ECONOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF 15-MINUTE INTRADAY
ELECTRICITY PRICES

RÜDIGER KIESEL
FLORENTINA PARASCHIV

WORKING PAPERS ON FINANCE NO. 2015/21

INSTITUTE OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH AND COMPUTATIONAL FINANCE
(IOR/CF – HSG)

OCTOBER 2015

Econometric analysis of 15-minute intraday
electricity prices

R¨udiger Kiesela,∗, Florentina Paraschivb,∗∗

aChair for Energy Finance, University of Duisburg-Essen, Universit¨atsstrasse 12,
D-45117 Essen, Germany
bInstitute for Operations Research and Computational Finance,
University of St. Gallen, Bodanstrasse 6, CH-9000, St. Gallen, Switzerland

Abstract

The trading activity in the German intraday electricity market has increased
signiﬁcantly over the last years. This is partially due to an increasing share
of renewable energy, wind and photovoltaic, which requires power generators
to balance out the forecasting errors in their production. We investigate the
bidding behaviour in the intraday market by looking at both last prices and
continuous bidding, in the context of a fundamental model. A unique data
set of 15-minute intraday prices and intraday-updated forecasts of wind and
photovoltaic has been employed and price bids are modelled by prior informa-
tion on fundamentals. We show that intraday prices adjust asymmetrically to
both forecasting errors in renewables and to the volume of trades dependent
on the threshold variable demand quote, which reﬂects the expected demand
covered by the planned traditional capacity in the day-ahead market. The
location of the threshold can be used by market participants to adjust their
bids accordingly, given the latest updates in the wind and photovoltaic fore-
casting errors and the forecasts of the control area balances.

Keywords:
forecasting model

intraday electricity prices, bidding behavior, renewable energy,

∗Part of the work was done while the author was visiting Center of Advanced Study,
Norwegian Academy of Sciences and Letters, Oslo, as a member of the group: Stochastics
for Environmental and Financial Economics

∗∗Corresponding author: Florentina Paraschiv, ﬂorentina.paraschiv@unisg.ch; Part of
the work has been done during my visiting terms at the University of Duisburg-Essen,
funded by the Chair for Energy Trading and Finance.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

October 8, 2015

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2671379 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

1. Introduction

Trading in the intraday electricity markets increased rapidly since the
opening of the market. This may be driven by the need of photovoltaic and
wind power operators to balance their production forecast errors, i.e. de-
viations between forecasted and actual production. Evidence for this is a
jump in the volume of intraday trading as the direct marketing of renewable
energy was introduced. Furthermore, there may be a generally increased in-
terest in intraday trading activities due to proprietary trading. We study the
structure of intraday trading of electricity and identify the price-driving fac-
tors. Our main goal is to identify market fundamental factors that inﬂuence
the bidding behavior in the 15-minute intraday market at European Power
Exchange (EPEX).

Along the basic timeline of electricity trading activities, see Figure 1, the
intraday activities relate mostly to further adjustments of positions after the
closure of the day-ahead market.

Figure 1: Timing Electricity Trading

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

While day-ahead trading oﬀers the possibility to correct long-term pro-
duction schedule (build on the forward markets) in terms of hourly produc-
tion schedule of power plants (Delta Hedging) and to adjust for residual load
proﬁles on an hourly basis, the increasing share of renewable energy sources
(wind, solar) in electricity markets requires a ﬁner adjustment.

According to the Equalization Mechanism Ordinance (ger.: Verordnung

zur Weiterentwicklung des bundesweiten Ausgleichsmechanismus, abbr.:

2

 Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2671379 23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

AuglMechV) all electricity generated by renewable sources has to be traded
day-ahead. This is usually done by the transmission system operator (TSO)
with the plant operator receiving a legally guaranteed feed-in-tariﬀ. From
2012 on the inclusion of a market premium led direct marketers within the
feed-in premium support scheme to enter the market as well. Trading of elec-
tricity from a renewable energy source is based on forecasts which may have
a horizon of up to 36 h (taking some data-handling into account). To correct
errors in forecasts the AusglMechV requires the marketers of renewable en-
ergy to use the intraday market to balance diﬀerences in actual and updated
forecasts. Intraday trading starts at 3 pm and takes place continuously until
up to 45 min (by 2015 this was shortened to 30 min) before the start of the
traded quarter-hour. As forecasts change regularly, marketers may sell and
buy the same contract at diﬀerent times during the trading period.

After the closure of the intraday market balancing energy has to be used
to close diﬀerences between available and forecasted electricity. As a smaller
number of power plants are used for balancing energy the merit-order curve
is steeper than that in the intraday market. Thus on average larger prices
are paid and marketers aim at minimising this diﬀerence, see [5]. In addition,
TSOs may impose sanctions on marketers who frequently require balancing
energy.

Balancing energy is supplied by generators with the necessary ﬂexibility to
balance the market. In case generation is below demand positive balancing
energy is used, otherwise negative balancing energy.
[6] and [13] contain
a detailed description of the integration of renewable energy in electricity
markets and the regulatory requirements and we refer the reader to these
sources for further information.

The day-ahead market (spot market) and the balancing markets have
been investigated extensively. For example, ([22]) show that the day-ahead
price formation process at EPEX depends on the interaction/substitution
eﬀect between the traditional production capacity (coal, gas, oil) with the
ﬂuctuant renewable energies (wind and photovoltaic (PV)). Further empirical
studies on intraday/balancing markets include [1], [16]. Also, [18] studies
strategic behaviour linking day-ahead and balancing markets.

An investigation in the merit-order eﬀect is given by [2], wo ﬁnd that
electricity generation by wind and PV has reduced spot market prices con-
siderably by 6 e/MWh in 2010 rising to 10 e/MWh in 2012. They also show
that merit order eﬀects are projected to reach 14-16 e/MWh in 2016.

Recent studies of the intraday high-frequency electricity prices at EPEX

3

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

are [8] and [9] who look at liquidity eﬀects and forecast determinants on a
hourly basis. Also, [3] considers trading strategies to minimise costs from
imbalances for both PV and wind, but generates price changes in terms of a
reduced-form model (using a stochastic process). The focus lies in develop-
ing a trading strategy for a given setting, and not on explaining the relevant
price process. Several studies have discussed the eﬀects of prognosis errors
for wind generation (see [15] and [20]). As Figure 2 suggests a PV production
introduces quarter-hour ramps quite naturally. In addition, changes in fore-
casts of renewable energy production require a timely correction of day-ahead
positions. However, photovoltaic has not been investigated so far.

Figure 2: Quarter Hour Ramps

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

[8] and [9] used the ex-post published wind infeed data to explain ex-ante
their impact on the day-ahead market. These are publicly available data
from the Transparency Platform EPEX. However, the actual infeed is only
known ex-post and therefore it cannot be used directly to explain the price
formation on the intraday market. In fact, the intraday market participants
have access to updated forecasts of wind. In our study, we will extend the
existing literature by taking into account the intraday updated forecasts for
wind and PV, which have been supplied by EWE Trading GmbH.

Each day, hourly day-ahead electricity prices are revealed around 2 pm
at EPEX (see [23]). At the same time, market participants have access to
forecasts for wind and PV published by each Transmission System Operator
(TSO) in 15-minute intervals for the next day. However, wind and PV fore-

4

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

casts are updated frequently during the trading period. Thus, at the time
when market participants place their bids for a particular intraday delivery
period (hour, quarter of hour), updated information about the forecasting
errors of renewables becomes available. In consequence, also deviations be-
tween the intraday prices and the day-ahead price for a speciﬁc hour are
expected to occur. Our main research question is, thus, to which extent do
market participants change their bidding behavior when new information on
wind and PV forecasts becomes available. We will employ a unique data set
of the latest forecasts of wind and PV available at the time of the bid.

Our analysis is twofold: Firstly, we derive an asymmetric fundamental
model for the diﬀerence between the last price bid for a certain quarter
of hour and the day-ahead price for that hour. We distinguish between
summer/winter, peak/oﬀ-peak hours. We test for asymmetric behavior of
prices to forecasting errors of renewable energy dependent on the demand
quote regime and further investigate the typical jigsaw pattern of intraday
prices. Thus, we identify a seasonality shape that provides traders important
information about the time of the day when they can bid, dependent on their
demand/supply proﬁles. Furthermore, the eﬀect of volume of trades/market
liquidity are investigated. Secondly, we are interested in the bidding behavior
of market participants in the intraday electricity market, continuous bidding.
We thus analyse the continuous trades and disentangle the eﬀect of market
fundamentals dependent on the time of the day. The econometric model is
replicated for several traded hourly quarters, in diﬀerent time of the day.
In particular, we are interested to see how delta bid prices change when
new information becomes available in the intraday renewable forecasts for
wind and PV. We look at the trade-oﬀ between autoregressive terms and
fundamental factors impacting the intraday price formation process.

Our contribution to the existing literature is twofold: we use ex-ante fore-
casts of fundamental variables and employ high-frequency, namely quarter-
hourly intraday prices.

2. Model architecture

Our main assumption is that the electricity intraday price formation pro-
cess depends on how much traditional capacity has been allocated in the
day-ahead market and in which proportion it covers the forecasted demand.
Let us consider two possible market regimes:

5

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

1. The traditional capacity planned for the day-ahead satisﬁes the ex-

pected demand for a certain hour;

2. There is a certain demand quote uncovered by the planned capacity.

Thus, in scenario 2, negative forecasting errors of wind and PV will increase
faster the intraday prices than in scenario 1, due to the excess demand pres-
sure. Viceversa, in scenario 1, positive forecasting errors in renewables will
put pressure on traditional suppliers to reduce the production, since renew-
ables are fed into the grid with priority (on average 20% of electricity pro-
duction in Germany is wind and PV based). Thus, prices will decrease faster
than in scenario 2, where the excess of renewables (positive updated fore-
casts) will balance out the excess demand. Therefore, in the context of a
threshold model, we investigate whether there is an asymmetric adjustment
of the intraday prices to forecasting errors in renewables, dependent on the
demand quote regime (proportion of the forecasted demand for electricity
in the planned traditional capacity for the day-ahead). The location of the
threshold in the demand quote is estimated and this gives an indication of the
bidding behavior in the intraday market. Market participants can compare
the identiﬁed threshold value to the forecasted demand quote for a certain
hour to identify the market regime and to further deﬁne a bidding strategy.
Employing the demand quote as threshold variable is supported by the lit-
erature as several papers have found that total electricity demand inﬂuences
price behaviour strongly. In [14] it is shown that the ratio between wind and
conventional power production aﬀects the electricity price most (the so-called
wind penetration). [19] identify the residual load, the electricity demand that
needs to be met by conventional power, as an important variable.

To include trading volume as a fundamental variable is also supported
by the literature as e.g. [6] ﬁnd that the forecast balancing costs in intraday
trading are linked to the trading volume. This is in line with earlier papers ,
such as [17] and [4], who estimate asymmetric GARCH models and include
traded electricity volume in the variance equation to study its impact on
price volatility.

In a ﬁrst part of our analysis we aim at a model for the diﬀerence between
the last intraday bid price for a certain quarter of an hour and the day-ahead
price for that speciﬁc hour. As a prerequisite for our modeling approach, we
investigate the typical jigsaw pattern of the 15-minute intraday prices and
control for seasonality. Figures 3, 4, 5 show the long-term mean of last prices

6

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

and average prices bid for a certain quarter of an hour between 01/01/2014–
01/07/2014. During the day, the jigsaw pattern is mainly explained by the
following situation: Renewable energy providers sell day-ahead the full hour
(average of all quarters). During morning (evening) hours the sun goes up
(down) so in the ﬁrst quarter there is a buy-pressure on them as they are
not able to produce the hourly average. On the other hand, in the fourth
quarter they produce too much and have to sell.

We also found a persistent jigsaw pattern of prices during oﬀ-peak hours.
This is driven by the production design of fossil power plants (supply side:
when it starts low and ends high) or power-intensive industry (demand side:
when it starts high and ends low).

A reason for that my be inter-temporal restrictions in using fossil plants.
In addition to fuel costs, these plants have ramp-up and ramp-down costs,
which prevent plant operators from shutting down plants in case of drops in
demand or starting up plants in case of spikes in demand. The short-term
marginal costs from this may dominate fuel costs.

3. Data

As motivated in section 2, for the analysis we employed historical day-
ahead and intraday electricity prices for 15-minute products in the continuous
trading system between 01/01/2014–30/06/2014. As fundamental variables
selected in this study we refer to demand forecast, power plant availability,
intraday updated forecasts for wind and photovoltaic, volume trades in the
continuous trading, and the control area balance. The latter represents the
corresponding use of balancing power in the balancing market1. In partic-
ular, the control area balance corresponds to the sum of all balance group
deviations of balance groups registered at the transmission system operator
and of the relevant balance groups owned by the transmission system oper-
ator (e.g. EEG, grid losses, unintentional deviation)2. In Tables 1 and 2 we
give an overview of the data sources and their frequency, respectively.

1As balance group deviations are not immediately available online the control area
balance is calculated on the basis of the corresponding use of balancing power. The
published data are values from operating measurements that are adjusted by measurement
corrections if necessary. The actual settlement-relevant data can be retrieved under the
prices for grid balancing.

2see http://www.tennettso.de

7

Figure 3: Seasonality pattern of the last prices and average prices bid for a certain
quarter of an hour during the peak hours in summer. The right axes show the
sunshine duration and the sum of volumes traded.

8

0501001502002500102030405060700153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530458910111213141516171819Sunshine Duration EUR/MWh Intraday quarter-hourly prices long-term mean summer Price_Last_AvgMean_Price_AvgSunshine_Avg02004006008001000120014001600180020000102030405060700153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530458910111213141516171819Volume Trades  EUR/MWh Intraday quarter-hourly prices long-term mean summer Price_Last_AvgSunshine_AvgSumVol_AvgFigure 4: Seasonality pattern of the last prices and average prices bid for a certain
quarter of an hour during the peak hours in winter. The right axes show the
sunshine duration and the sum of volumes traded.

9

0102030405060708090010203040506070800153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530458910111213141516171819Sunshine Duration EUR/MWh Intra-day quarter-hourly prices long-term mean winter  Price_Last_AvgMean_Price_AvgSunshine_Avg0200400600800100012001400010203040506070800153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530458910111213141516171819Volume Trades EUR/MWh Intra-day quarter-hourly prices long-term mean winter  Price_Last_AvgMean_Price_AvgSumVol_AvgFigure 5: Seasonality pattern of the last prices and average prices bid for a certain
quarter of an hour during the oﬀ-peak hours in summer and winter, respectively.
The right axis shows the sum of volumes traded.

10

02004006008001000120014000102030405060700153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530452021222301234567Sum Volume Average Prices Long-term mean intraday quarter-hourly prices offpeak summer Price_Last_AvgMean_Price_AvgSumVol_Avg0200400600800100012000102030405060700153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530450153045015304501530452021222301234567Sum Volume Average Prices Long-term mean intraday quarter-hourly prices offpeak winter Price_Last_AvgMean_Price_AvgSumVol_AvgDescription

Data Source

Variable
units
Day-ahead Price
EUR/MWh

Intraday Price
EUR/MWh

Intraday Volume
Trades
MWh
Wind Forecast
MW

PV Forecast
MW

Expected Power
Plant Availability
MW

Expected Demand
MW

Market clearing price for a cer-
tain hour in the day-ahead auc-
tions (Phelix)
Intraday electricity prices for
15-minute products in the con-
tinuous trading
Intraday volume trades for 15-
minute products in the contin-
uous trading
Sum of intraday forecasted in-
feed of wind electricity into the
grid
Sum of intraday forecasted in-
feed of PV electricity into the
grid
Ex-ante expected power plant
availability for electricity pro-
duction on the delivery day
(daily granularity), daily pub-
lished at 10:00 am
Demand forecast for the rele-
vant hour on the delivery day

Control area bal-
ance
MW

Balancing market margins,
available ex-post for a certain
delivery period

European Power Exchange (EPEX)
https://www.epexspot.com/en/

European Energy Exchange Trans-
parency Platform:
http://www.eex-transparency.com/de
European Energy Exchange Trans-
parency Platform:
http://www.eex-transparency.com/de
EWE TRADING GmbH
http://www.ewe.com/en/

EWE TRADING GmbH
http://www.ewe.com/en/

European Energy Exchange
& transmission system operators:
ftp://infoproducts.eex.com

European Network of Transmission
System Operators (ENTSOE):
https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
Transmission system operators:
http://www.50Hertz.com,
http://www.amprion.de,
http://www.transnetbw.de,
http://www.tennettso.de

Table 1: Overview of fundamental variables used in the analysis

Variable

Day-ahead Price

Intraday Price

Intraday Volume Trades

Wind Forecast

Daily Hourly

×

PV Forecast

Expected Power Plant Availability ×

Expected Demand

Control area balance

×

quarter-hourly

×
×
×
×

×

Table 2: Data granularity of fundamental variables

183

4. Methodology

184

185

4.1. Threshold model speciﬁcation

The technical speciﬁcation of our model follows [21] and reads:

yi = θ(cid:48)

1xi + εi, ωi ≤ τ,

(1)

11

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

yi = θ(cid:48)

2xi + εi, ωi > τ,

(2)

where ωi is the threshold variable used to split the sample into two regimes.
The random variable εi is a regression error.
Our observed sample is {yi, xi, ωi}n

i=1, where yi represent the dependent
variable and xi is an m-vector of independent variables. The threshold vari-
able ωi may be an element of xi and is assumed to have a continuous dis-
tribution. To write the model in a single equation3, we deﬁne the dummy
variable di(τ ) = 1[ωi ≤ τ ], where 1[·] is the indicator function and we set
xi(τ ) := xidi(τ ). Furthermore, let λ(cid:48)
n = θ(cid:48)
1 denote the threshold eﬀect.
Thus, equations (1) and (2) become:

2 − θ(cid:48)

yi = θ(cid:48)xi + λ(cid:48)

nxi(τ ) + εi

(3)

In order to simplify the threshold estimation procedure, we rewrite equa-
tion (3) in matrix notation. We deﬁne the vectors Y ∈ Rn and ε ∈ Rn
by stacking the variables yi and εi, and the n×m matrixes X ∈ Rn×m and
X(τ ) ∈ Rn×m by stacking the vectors x(cid:48)
i and xi(τ )(cid:48). Then (3) can be written
as:

Y = Xθ + X(τ )λn + ε

(4)

The regression parameters are (θ, λn, τ ) and the natural estimator is least

squares (LS).

4.2. Hansen’s grid search to locate the most likely threshold

To determine the location of the most likely threshold, we will apply
Hansen’s grid search.
In the implementation of this threshold estimation
procedure, we follow [11] and [12]. This paper develops a statistical theory for
threshold estimation in the regression context. As mentioned in the previous
section, the regression parameters are (θ, λn, τ ). Let

Sn(θ, λ, τ ) = (Y − Xθ − X(τ )λ)(cid:48)(Y − Xθ − X(τ )λ)

(5)

be the sum of squared errors function. Then, by deﬁnition, the LS estima-
tors ˆθ, ˆλ, ˆτ jointly minimize (5). For this minimization, τ is assumed to be
restricted to a bounded set [τ , ¯τ ] = Ω. The LS estimator is also the MLE

3see Hansen (2000)

12

when εi is i.i.d. N (0, σ2). Following [11], the computationally easiest method
to obtain the LS estimates is through concentration. Conditional on τ , equa-
tion (4) is linear in θ and in λn, yielding the conditional OLS estimators ˆθ(τ )
and ˆλ(τ ) by regression of Y on X(τ )∗ = [XX(τ )]. The concentrated sum of
squared errors function is

Sn(τ ) = Sn(ˆθ(τ ), ˆλ(τ ), τ ) = Y (cid:48)Y − Y (cid:48)X(τ )∗(X(τ )∗(cid:48)X(τ )∗)−1X(τ )∗(cid:48)Y,

and ˆτ is the value that minimizes Sn(τ ), i.e.,

ˆτ = argmin Sn(τ )

208

209

To test the hypothesis H0 : τ = τ0, a standard approach is to use the like-
lihood ratio statistic under the auxiliary assumption that εi is i.i.d. N (0, σ2).

Let

LRn(τ ) := n

Sn(τ ) − Sn(ˆτ )
Sn(ˆτ )

.

The likelihood ratio test of H0 is to reject for large values of LRn(τ0).
Using the LRn(τ ) function, asymptotic p-values for the likelihood ratio test
are derived:

pn = 1 − (cid:0)1 − exp(−1/2 · LRn(τ0)2)(cid:1)2 .

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

5. Fundamental modeling of intraday prices

We examine whether deviations between the intraday and day-ahead
prices for a certain quarter of a hourly delivery period are caused by market
fundamentals. Deviations between the intraday and the day-ahead prices are
caused by the ﬂuctuant renewable energy which must be fed into the grid
with priority. Thus, at the time when market participants place their bids for
a certain delivery period intraday, they update their information about the
forecasted wind and PV for the relevant quarter of an hour. Wind and PV
power operators must balance out their production forecast errors and devi-
ations from the day-ahead price are expected to occur. Forecasting errors of
renewables are thus expected to cause deviations between the intraday and
day-ahead prices. Their impact on prices, however, should not be judged in
isolation, but dependent on the demand quote, meaning the extent at which
forecasted demand for a certain hour is covered by the traditional capacity
planned in the day-ahead market.

13

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

As discussed in section 2, dependent on the demand quote regime, thus, if
there is excess demand or not in the market, positive and negative forecasting
errors in wind and PV are expected to have diﬀerent impact on price devia-
tions. In the context of a threshold model speciﬁcation, where the threshold
variable is the demand quote, we will examine these dynamics.

5.1. Modeling deviations of last prices from the day-ahead price

In the ﬁrst part of our analysis, we analyze the diﬀerences between the
historical last prices bid for a certain 15-minute delivery period in the intra-
day market and the day-ahead price for the corresponding hour. We used
historical last prices sorted for quarter-hourly products between 01/01/2014–
30/06/2014. As market fundamentals we include positive/negative forecast-
ing errors in wind and PV, deﬁned as deviations between the latest forecast
available at the time when the last prices are observed and the day-ahead
available forecasts. The last prices for a certain delivery period are placed
in the market not later than 30 minutes before the delivery period starts4.
At this time, market participants can also forecast the volume in the bal-
ancing market, namely positions that could not be ﬁlled in the intra-day
market. These positions are deﬁned by the Transmission System Operators
as “control area balances”5.

We derive the forecasts of the control area balance on an autoregressive
model.6 Historical control area balances are therefore modeled by an autore-
gressive model, as shown in Table 3. The order of lags has been identiﬁed
by examining the autocorrelation function and we further performed Akaike
(AIC) and Bayesian (BIC) information criteria to select the best model7.
We found that the control area balances for a certain 15-minute delivery pe-
riod can be forecasted based on the last 8 observations (up to 2 hours ago).
Forecasts based on this model are further included in our model estimation.

The demand quote is deﬁned as:

DemandQuotet = DemandF orecastt/P P Adt

(6)

253

where d is the day-ahead and t one hour in day d.

4Since 16th July, 2015, EPEX Spot will shorten the lead time from 45- to 30 minute be-
fore delivery (see European Power Exchange (EPEX) https://www.epexspot.com/en/).

5see http://www.tennettso.de
6Discussions with traders revealed that this is a common praxis in the industry.
7Results are available upon request

14

Table 3: Autoregressive model for control area balances

Dependent Variable: Balances

Method: Least Squares

Included observations: 2535 after adjustments

Variable

C

Balances(-1)

Balances(-2)

Balances(-3)

Balances(-4)

Balances(-5)

Balances(-6)

Balances(-7)

Balances(-8)

R-squared

Coeﬃcient

Std. Error

t-Statistic

18.551*

0.818

0.055

-0.072

0.162

-0.132

-0.013

-0.004

0.047

6.228

0.019

0.025

0.025

0.025

0.025

0.025

0.025

0.019

2.978

41.195

2.160

-2.809

6.359

-5.166

-0.543

-0.185

2.369

0.727 Mean dependent var

Adjusted R-squared

0.726

S.D. dependent var

S.E. of regression

301.8479 Akaike info criterion

Sum squared resid

2.30E+08

Schwarz criterion

Log likelihood

-18067.2 Hannan-Quinn criter.

F-statistic

844.035 Durbin-Watson stat

Prob(F-statistic)

0

Prob.

0.002

0

0.031

0.005

0

0

0.586

0.852

0.017

131.686

577.588

14.261

14.281

14.268

1.998

The order of lags has been identiﬁed by examining the autocorrelation function and we further performed

Akaike (AIC)and Bayesian (BIC) information criteria to select the best model.

15

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

In Tables 4 and 5 we show descriptive statistics of the selected input
variables. We distinguish between summer/winter, peak/oﬀ peak hours (as
shown in [23]). We observe that, independent on the season, on average the
intraday last price for 15-minute delivery periods is below the day-ahead price
for the corresponding hour. Furthermore, the diﬀerence becomes larger and
more volatile for oﬀ-peak than for peak hours and in winter than in summer.
The control area balances are, on average, negative in winter and turn into
positive in summer.

On average, the demand quote is higher and more volatile during peak
than in oﬀ-peak hours, which makes the planning of traditional capacity for
the day ahead more diﬃcult.

To test for stationarity we perform an augmented Dickey-Fuller test (ADF
test). For all variables we reject the null hypothesis of a unit root at a 95%
signiﬁcance level meaning that the data is stationary.

As shown in Figures 3 and 4, there is a clear jigsaw seasonality in the
last prices, independent on the season. Based on the information of the long-
term dynamics of historical last prices, we control for the seasonal pattern
by introducing dummy variables as follows:

• Summer peak

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters

for the interval 08:00–13:00 (Morning pattern)

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters

for the interval 14:00–18:00 (Afternoon pattern)

• Winter peak

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters

for the interval 08:00–12:00 (Morning pattern)

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters

for the interval 13:00–17:00 (Afternoon pattern)

• Summer oﬀ-peak

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters

for the interval 20:00–01:00 (Evening descending pattern)

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters
for the interval 03:00–07:00 (Early morning ascending pattern)

16

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

• Winter oﬀ-peak

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters
for the interval 20:00–21:00 and 04:00–07:00 (Descending pattern)

– We introduce one Dummy variable for each of the Q1–Q4 quarters

for the interval 23:00–03:00 (Night, ascending pattern)

The model speciﬁcation reads:

(P ID

t − P Dahd

t

)h = ch + βhControlAreaBalancet1h
t 1n

+ khn(W indID
t − W indDahd
− W indDahd
)1h

)1h
t
t + khn(P V ID
t − P V Dahd

t + θhDemandQuotet1h
t
t + khp(W indID
t 1n
t

t −

t 1p

)1h

t

t

+ khp(P V ID

t − P V Dahd

t

)1h

t 1p

t +

8
(cid:88)

j=1

δh
j DQj

(P ID

t − P Dahd

t

)l = cl + βlControlAreaBalancet1l
t1n

+ kln(W indID
t − W indDahd
)1l
− W indDahd

)1l
t
t − P V Dahd
t + kln(P V ID

t + θlDemandQuotet1l
t
t + klp(W indID
t1n
t

t −

t1p

)1l

t

t

+ klp(P V ID

t − P V Dahd

t

)1l

t1p

t +

8
(cid:88)

j=1

δl
jDQj

(7)

As threshold variable, the demand quote splits the data in two regimes:
high/suﬃcient demand quote (“h”) or low (“l”). The indicator function 1p/n
further distinguishes in each regime between positive/negative forecasting
errors in the renewables.

t

5.2. Model for the continuous trades for quarter-hourly products

In the second part, we examine the continuous trades for several quarter-
hourly products. Thus, we are interested to see how delta bid prices change
when new information on wind and PV for a certain delivery period of in-
terest becomes available intraday. We are interested in the bidding behavior
of market participants in the intraday electricity market as inﬂuenced by

17

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

320

321

322

market fundamentals. In particular, we are interested to see how delta bid
prices for a certain quarter of an hour change when new information on the
forecasts for wind and PV becomes available. We look at the trade-oﬀ be-
tween autoregressive terms and fundamental factors impacting the intraday
price formation process.

The model speciﬁcation reads:

(∆P ID
t

2 ∆P ID

1 ∆P ID
w (∆W indID
P V (∆P V ID

)h = ch + αh
+ khn
+ khn
t
+ γhDemandQuoteDahd

3 ∆P ID
t−31h
t−21h
t + αh
t + αh
t
t 1p
w (∆W indID
t )1h
t 1n
t + khp
t + khp
t 1p
P V (∆P V ID
)1h
t
t
t 1h
t + (cid:15)hV olumeID
1h

t−11h
t )1h
t 1n
)1h

t

t

t + βh

√

∆t

(∆P ID
t

)l = cl + αl
+ kln
+ kln
t
+ γlDemandQuoteDahd

1∆P ID
t−11l
t + αl
2∆P ID
t−21l
t + αl
3∆P ID
t−31l
t
t1p
w (∆W indID
t )1l
t1n
t + klp
w (∆W indID
t )1l
t + klp
t1p
t1n
)1l
P V (∆P V ID
)1l
P V (∆P V ID
t
t
t 1l
t + (cid:15)lV olumeID
1l

t

t

t + βl

√

∆t

(8)

t

t

, and in the PV, ∆P V ID

The examination of autocorrelation function of price changes for a cer-
tain quarter of an hour shows that the ﬁrst 3 lags of price changes should
be selected in the autoregressive part of the model. Changes in the wind,
∆W indID
, are real time updated forecasts, avail-
able at the time when the bids are placed.8 V olumeID
is the volume trade
at the time when the price change is observed. The bids for a certain quarter
of an hour do not occur at equal time intervals in the continuous bidding.
In fact, market participants start bidding around 4 pm, after the day-ahead
prices are published at EPEX and continuous trades go up to 45 minutes
before the beginning of the delivery period. Thus, the time steps between
consecutively placed bids are not equal, but can vary from some seconds to
several hours. We take into account this time discontinuity by including in
our list of explanatory variables the control variable

∆t.

√

t

In Tables 6 and 7 we show descriptive statistics for the price changes and

8Results are available upon request

18

323

324

325

326

327

328

329

330

volume trades for the 15-minute continuous trading for delivery periods in
diﬀerent times of the day. We observe that the volatility of intraday price
changes increases continuously between the morning quarter of hours (H7Q1)
up to noon (H12Q4) and decreases again towards the evening (quarters of
hour 18). Thus, the higher the demand, the larger the average price changes
in the continuous trading. The volume of trades is on average the highest
and more volatile for the ﬁrst and last quarters of each one of the investigated
hours, independent on the time of the day.

331

6. Empirical results

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

353

354

355

356

357

6.1. Modeling deviations of last prices from the day-ahead price

The model shown in Equation (7) has been estimated for the historical
diﬀerences between the last prices and the day-ahead prices separately for
winter and summer and we further distinguished among peak (8 am and
8 pm) and oﬀ-peak hours. This approach is justiﬁed by the diﬀerent price
levels in summer compared to the winter time and by the diﬀerent demand
proﬁles during peak and oﬀ-peak hours (see [23] for an extensive discussion
on the seasonality of electricity prices).

The overall OLS estimation results for each case study are shown in Ta-
ble 8. We further tested for a threshold eﬀect in the demand quote in each
case. The threshold variable is the demand quote and the threshold loca-
tion is estimated using the methodology described in section 4.2. All model
parameters in Equations (7) are allowed to vary among regimes. We found
evidence for signiﬁcant threshold eﬀect only in the case of winter peak case
study. Results are available in Table 9.

Throughout all variables are signiﬁcant and show the expected sign (see
Table 8). Dummy variables which explain the jigsaw pattern are statisti-
cally signiﬁcant and their inclusion still allows signiﬁcant marginal eﬀects of
fundamental variables on delta prices. The coeﬃcients of positive/negative
forecasting errors in wind and PV are signiﬁcant at 1% signiﬁcance level.
Positive forecasting errors of wind/PV signal market participants more ca-
pacity available in the market than planned. This will have a decreasing eﬀect
on the residual demand and will further decrease last price bids. Viceversa,
when updated forecasts signal less infeed from renewables than planned in
the day ahead (negative forecasting errors), market participants will increase
their bid prices intraday accordingly.

19

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

375

376

377

378

379

380

381

382

383

384

385

386

387

388

389

390

391

392

393

394

395

At the time of the last price bids, market participants do not know yet the
real control area balances, but forecasts of those are used in practice. This
is reﬂected in the coeﬃcients of balances forecasts which are statistically
signiﬁcant in all case studies and have a positive sign. Higher control area
balances are a signal of excess demand which has not been yet balanced out in
the intraday market, and this will be reﬂected in higher intraday last prices.
We observe that the coeﬃcient of demand quote is negative during the oﬀ-
peak regimes, but it turns into positive during peak hours. In both summer
and winter regimes, the mean value of demand quote in the oﬀ-peak hours is
slightly below one, touching a maximum of 1.291 and 1.178, respectively (as
shown in Tables 4 and 5). Thus, on average, the traditional capacity planned
in the market covers the expected demand for the day-ahead. However,
higher levels of demand quote (up to a maximum observed in oﬀ-peak of
about 1.2), power producers plan less capacity for the day ahead, due to
a higher expectation of renewables infeed in the market. It is known that
in the night hours extreme wind infeed has been empirically observed (see
[23]). The input from renewable energies is expected to be, on average, 20%
of the total input production mix in Germany (see [22]). Renewables will
be fed with priority into the grid, decreasing the residual demand. This
will imply further that price bids in the intraday market will be in the less
convex area of the merit order curve, thus market participants will bid lower
prices intraday. This assumption is conﬁrmed by the negative sign of the
coeﬃcients of demand quote in the oﬀ-peak hours winter/summer, as shown
in Table 8.

In summer peak, descriptive statistics show that on average, the demand
quote exceeds 1.2. Thus, power producers plan less capacity in the market,
given the volatile infeed from photovoltaic in peak hours. However, demand
quotes above 1.2 reﬂect the situation where the 20% expected infeed from
renewables will not suﬃce and there will be still high residual demand in the
market. This will have an increasing eﬀect on intraday prices in general and
on the last prices in particular, which is conﬁrmed by the positive sign of the
coeﬃcient of demand quote. This is reﬂected in the high maximum spreads
between the last prices and day-ahead prices observed in summer peak, as
shown in Table 5.

We found no signiﬁcant threshold eﬀect in the demand quote in summer-
related case studies and in winter oﬀ-peak. This shows that in those seasons,
market participants adjust linearly last prices (and implicitly the spreads
last prices-day-ahead prices) to market fundamentals. However, in winter

20

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

425

426

427

428

429

430

431

peak time we found evidence for asymmetric behavior (see Table 9). Thus,
a threshold in the demand quote was found signiﬁcant at the level of 1.058.
In the regime of low levels of demand quote (regime 1, < 1.058), we observe
that coeﬃcients are generally not statistically signiﬁcant. That is, power
producers have low expectation of renewable infeed in the day-ahead, and in
consequence plan suﬃcient traditional capacity to satisfy expected demand.
However, when demand levels are high, thus in regime 2, delta prices adjust
linearly to forecasting errors in renewable energy, to control area balances
and to demand quote. An increase in demand quote in this regime will
suppress bid prices in the intraday market, since again higher demand quote
levels reﬂect a high expectation of infeed from renewable energies, which
will lower the price level. The coeﬃcient of control area balances is positive
and signiﬁcant. This reﬂects two situations:
if there is high infeed from
renewables in the market, negative forecasts of control area balances will
suppress the intraday last prices. By contrary, in the presence of high demand
quote not fully covered by renewables infeed, positive forecasts in control area
balances will increase intraday price bids.

The model can be used to forecast the last prices submitted for a certain
quarter of one hour intraday. This is based on a rigourous forecasting model
for the control area balances. This model is highly relevant for practitioners:
the main goal of market participants is to clear their positions in the day-
ahead and intraday markets and avoid participating in the more expensive
balancing market.

6.2. Model for the continuous trades for quarter-hourly products

We estimated the model speciﬁcation shown in Equation (8) for each one
of the following delivery periods: hour 7 (quarters 1–4), hour 12 (quarters
1–4) and hour 18 (quarters 1–4). We aim at analysing whether the impact
of fundamentals on the bidding behavior depends on the time of the day.
Thus, we analyse representative delivery periods within one day: morning,
noon peak and (for winter evening) peak. In Tables 10, 13 and 15 we show
the overall estimation without threshold of the model shown in Equation (8)
applied to data sorted for hours 7, 12 and 18, respectively, quarters 1–4. In
the lower panel of the tables we show a benchmark, where we estimated the
model without fundamental variables. We further tested for threshold eﬀect
in the demand quote in all case studies and found signiﬁcant threshold eﬀect
as shown in Tables 11 and 12 for the four quarters of hour 7, and in Tables 14

21

432

433

434

435

436

437

438

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

457

458

459

460

461

462

463

464

465

466

467

468

469

and 16 for each quarter of hours 12 and 18, respectively. The threshold values
are signiﬁcant, accordingly to the likelihood ratio test, as discussed in section
4.1. The graphs and calculations corresponding to each threshold values are
available upon request. We have tested for threshold signiﬁcance also in the
other fundamental variables, but no conclusive results were obtained.

By comparing the values of the R2 between the lower and upper panels in
Tables 10, 13 and 15, we observe that in the model where market fundamen-
tals are considered, the R2s increases. The increase becomes more obvious
for the quarters of hour 12, where market fundamentals help increasing the
explanatory power of the model by up to 4 times.

By examining Tables 10 and 13 we observe that during morning (quar-
ters 1–4 hour 7) and evening (quarters 1–4 hour 18), market participants
adjust their intraday bids to lagged price changes, which replace the role of
fundamental variables. Thus, during morning and evening updated forecasts
of wind and photovoltaic become less relevant. However, the coeﬃcients of
fundamental variables become signiﬁcant during noon (see Table 13). This
can be due to the fact that over noon there is a high demand for electricity
in the market and in the same time it is more diﬃcult to optimally plan
capacity, given the highly volatile infeed from photovoltaic and wind. Thus,
the eﬀect of market fundamentals increases with an increased expected share
from renewable energy. In this context, updated forecasts in wind and PV
available at the time of the bid become highly relevant information for market
participants who adjust their bids accordingly. Negative forecasting errors in
wind and PV will increase intraday prices, while positive forecasting errors
in renewables will have a suppressing eﬀect on prices.

In particular, by examining the threshold model applied to price changes
for quarters 1–4 of hour 12 we can conclude an asymmetric adjustment to
forecasting errors in renewables (see Table 14). In both quarters 1 and 2 the
coeﬃcients of wind forecasting errors (positive/negative) are not signiﬁcant
in regime 1 (of low demand quote), but they turn signiﬁcant in regime 2.
Similarly, in the fourth quarter of hour 12 the coeﬃcient of negative fore-
casting errors of wind and of positive forecasting errors of PV are signiﬁcant
only in the second regime of the demand quote. These situations justify the
choice of demand quote as threshold variable: in the high regime of the de-
mand quote, thus, when there is excess demand uncovered by the planned
traditional capacity in the market, forecasting errors of renewables inﬂuence
the bidding behavior in the intraday market. Interestingly, for quarter 3 of
hour 12 we observe however a higher speed of adjustment of price changes to

22

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

478

479

480

481

482

483

484

485

486

487

488

489

490

491

492

493

494

495

496

497

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

505

506

507

forecasting errors from renewables in the lower demand quote regime than
in regime 2. However, this can be due to the fact that less than 10% of the
overall observations are concentrated in regime 1.

As already mentioned, the results of the threshold model applied to obser-
vations in hours 7 and 18 (Tables 11 and 16) show that the role of forecasting
errors of renewables for the morning and eyeing quarters drops. Still, pos-
itive forecasting errors in PV will decrease prices in quarter 4 of hour 7 in
regime 2, which reﬂects the ramping up eﬀect of the sun. By contrary, during
quarters 1–3 of hour 18, negative forecasting errors of wind will increase price
changes intraday in the same high regime of the demand quote. In addition,
negative forecasting errors of PV increase intraday prices in the ﬁrst quarter
of hour 18. After this quarter, however, the role of forecasting errors of PV
drops, showing the ramping down eﬀect of the sun.

We observe that the coeﬃcient of volume of trades is signiﬁcant only for
quarter 4 of hour 7 (see Table 10) and has a negative sign. This pattern
is again observed in the threshold model for hour 7 (see Table 11). When
we allow for threshold eﬀect in the demand quote, the coeﬃcient of volume
trades for quarter 4 of hour 7 is signiﬁcant and has a negative sign in regime
1, when the demand quote is below 1.415 (see Tables 11). The observations
in regime 1 are further split into two regimes, as shown in Table 12, where
a second threshold has been found signiﬁcant when the demand quote is at
1.178. In the low regime, with demand quote below 1.178, we observe again
that the coeﬃcient of volume of trades is statistically signiﬁcant and has a
negative sign. For the last quarter of hour 7 the intraday price is below the
average price bid for hour 7 in the day ahead due to the sun ramping up
eﬀect. This becomes apparent in the jigsaw pattern shown in Figures 3 and
4. Thus, the volume of trades in quarter 4 of hour 7 corresponds to the supply
side market participants who need to lower their conventional output, due
to an excess of infeed from PV. This has a suppressing eﬀect on the intraday
prices. By contrary, the coeﬃcient of volume trades becomes positive and
signiﬁcant in quarter 2 of hour 7 in the second sample split for this case study
(see Table 12). Thus, when the demand quote exceeds 1.145, demand side
volume of trades will further increase intraday prices.

The same pattern of coeﬃcients of volume of trades holds also for the
results concerning quarters 1–4 for hour 12. The coeﬃcient is signiﬁcant and
has a positive sign for the ﬁrst quarter and turns into negative in quarter 4
in the overall OLS estimation and in the upper regime of the demand quote,
as shown in Tables 13 and 14, respectively. However, for hour 18 this eﬀect is

23

508

509

510

511

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

525

526

527

528

529

530

531

532

533

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

541

542

reverted. As shown in Tables 15 and 16, the coeﬃcient of volume of trades is
signiﬁcant and has a negative sign for the ﬁrst quarter of hour 18 and turns
into positive in the last quarter. This reﬂects the sun ramping down eﬀect,
which causes the jigsaw pattern for the evening hours: the intraday price for
quarter 1 is below the average price bid in the day ahead for the respective
hours and it ends above it for quarter 4 (as shown in Figures 3 and 4). Thus,
in quarter 1 there is an excess of capacity and supply side volume of trades
will lower intraday prices. The opposite will happen for the last quarter of
evening hours.

7. Conclusion

In this study, we investigate the bidding behavior in the intraday electric-
ity market, in the context of a fundamental model. In particular, we shed
light on the impact of the updates in the forecasting errors of wind and pho-
tovoltaic (PV) on the 15-minute electricity price changes in the continuous
bidding. We employ a unique data set of the latest forecasts of wind and PV
available to traders prior to the placements of their price bids intraday. To
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study in the literature which models intra-
day prices based on prior information on fundamentals. We further control
for the demand/supply disequilibria, volume of trades, forecasts of control
area balances and model the typical jigsaw seasonality pattern of 15-minute
prices.

Our analysis is twofold. We ﬁrstly propose a forecasting model for the
changes between last prices bid intraday for a certain quarter of one hour
and the corresponding day-ahead price for that hour. This is highly relevant,
since market participants are mainly interested in squeezing their positions
in the day-ahead or intraday markets and avoid to need the control area
balancing market. Secondly, a fundamental model for the price changes in
the continuous bidding is derived. We found clear evidence that the bidding
behavior is inﬂuenced by forecasting errors in renewables, available at the
time of the bid. In particular, intraday prices increase in negative forecasting
errors, while positive forecasting errors have a suppressing eﬀect on prices.

We account for both linear and asymmetric adjustments of price changes
of market fundamentals. The asymmetries are driven by the threshold vari-
able demand-quote. The location of the threshold show market participants
the proportion in which the expected demand is covered by the planned

24

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

550

551

552

553

554

555

556

557

558

559

560

561

562

563

564

565

566

567

traditional capacity in the day-ahead market. Dependent whether the mar-
ket is in the lower/upper regime of the demand-quote, market participants
can intuitively form expectations about the expected infeed from renewable
energies, wind and PV, in the market and adjust their bids accordingly.
Our model desentangles the eﬀect of market fundamentals dependent on the
regime of the demand quote and further dependent of the time of the day.
Tangentially, market fundamentals inﬂuence more the bidding behavior in
the middle of the day than during mornings and evenings. There is an asym-
metric adjustment of electricity prices with respect to both volume of trades
and forecasting errors in renewables. Namely, in the high regime of the de-
mand quote, where there is too little planned traditional capacity in the
day-ahead market, market participants incorporate the information of the
latest available forecasting errors of renewables in their bids. This eﬀect is
more obvious for the mid-day quarters, but less obvious during morning and
evening hours.

The identiﬁcation of regimes in the demand quote helps also to desentan-
gle the demand/supply side volume of trades. In the regime of high demand
quote, demand-side volume of trades have an increasing eﬀect on prices. Vice
versa, supply-side volumes have a suppressing eﬀect on intraday prices, which
becomes obvious in the low regime of the demand quote.

Aknowledgements

The authors thank Hendrik Brockmeyer and Claus Liebenberger for their
valuable input in the data collection step. We further thank Karl Frauendor-
fer and Reik B¨orger for very useful discussions about the intraday markets.
We also thank Jonas Adam for technical support with this paper.

25

568

References

569

570

571

572

573

574

575

576

577

578

579

580

581

582

583

584

585

586

587

588

589

590

591

592

[1] Karakatsani, N., Bunn, D., 2008. Intra-day and regime-switching dynamics in

electricity price formation. Energy Economics, 30 1776–1797.

[2] Cludius, J., Hermann, H., Matthes, F., Graichen, V., 2014. The merit order

eﬀect of wind and photovoltaic electricity generation in germany 20082016:

Estimation and distributional implications. Energy Economics 44, 302313.

[3] E., Garnier, R., Madlener, 2014. Balancing forecast errors in continuous-trade

intraday markets. FCN WP 2/2014, RWTH Aachen University School of Busi-

ness and Economics.

[4] Gianfreda, A., 2010. Volatility and volume eﬀects in european electricity spot

markets. Econ. Notes 39 (1), 4763.

[5] Grabber, D., 2014. Handel mit Strom aus erneuerbaren Energien. Springer

Gabler.

[6] Graeber, D., Kleine, A., 2013. The combination of forecasts in the trading of

electricity from renewable energy sources. J Bus Econ 83, 409435.

[17] Hadsell, L., Marathe, A., 2006. A tarch examination of the return volatil-

ityvolume relationship in electricity futures. Appl. Financ. Econ. 16 (12),

893901.

[8] Hagemann, S., 2013. Price Determinants in the German Intraday Market for

Electricity: An Empirical Analysis - Working Paper, Essen.

[9] Hagemann, S., Weber, C., 2013. An Empirical Analysis of Liquidity and its

Determinants in The German Intraday Market for Electricity - Working Pa-

per, Essen.

[10] Hansen, B., 1996. Inference when a nuisance parameter is not identiﬁed under

the null hypothesis, Econometrica.

26

593

594

595

596

597

598

599

600

601

602

603

604

605

606

607

608

609

610

611

612

613

614

615

616

[11] Hansen, B., 2000. Sample splitting and threshold estimation, Econometrica,

68.

[12] Hansen, B. & Seo, B., 2000. Testing for threshold cointegration in vector error

correction models, Working Paper.

[13] Just, S., Weber, C., 2012. Strategic behavior in the german balancing energy

mechanism: Incentives, evidence, costs and solutions, eWL Working Paper.

[14] Jø’nsson, T., Pinson, P., Madsen, H., 2010. On the market impact of wind

energy forecasts. Energy Economics 32 (2), 313–320.

[15] Ketterer, J., 2014. The impact of wind power generation on the electricity

price in germany. Energy Economics 44, 270280.

[16] Klaeboe, G., Eriksrud, A.L., Fleten, S.-E., 2013. Benchmarking time series

based forecasting models for electricity balancing market prices. RPF Working

Paper No. 2013–006.

[17] Hadsell, L., Marathe, A., 2006. A tarch examination of the return volatil-

ityvolume relationship in electricity futures. Appl. Financ. Econ. 16 (12),

893901.

[18] Mller, C., Rachev, S., Fabozzi, F., 2011. Balancing energy strategies in elec-

tricity portfolio management. Energy Economics 22 (1), 2–11.

[19] Nicolosi, M., F¨ursch, M., 2009. The impact of an increasing share of res-e on

the conventional power market the example of germany. Z. Energiewirtschaft

3, 246254.

[20] Nicolosi, M., 2010. Wind power generation and power system ﬂexibility – An

empirical analysis of extreme events in Germany under the new negative price

regime, Energy Policy 38 (11), 7257–7268. .

27

617

618

619

620

621

622

623

[21] Paraschiv, F., 2013. Adjustment policy of deposit rates in the case of Swiss

non-maturing savings accounts. Journal of Applied Finance & Banking, 3(2),

271–323.

[22] Paraschiv, F., Erni, D. & Pietsch, R., 2014. The impact of renewable energies

on EEX day-ahead electricity prices. Energy Policy, 73, 196–210.

[23] Paraschiv, F., Fleten, S.-E. & Sch¨urle, M., 2015. A spot-forward model for

electricity prices with regime shifts. Energy Economics, 47, 142–153.

28

f
o

d
n
a

e
c
i
r
p

d
a
e
h
a
-
y
a
d

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

i

e
t
u
n
m
-
5
1

r
o
f

s
e
c
i
r
p

t
s
a
l

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
h

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
d

i

e
h
t

f
o

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

:
4

e
l
b
a
T

.
y
a
d
s
r
u
h
T
–
y
a
d
n
o
M

s
y
a
d

g
n
i
k
r
o
w
r
o
f

,
)
4
1
0
2
/
4
0
/
1
0
–
4
1
0
2
/
1
0
/
1
0
(

e
m

i
t

i

r
e
t
n
w
e
h
t

g
n
i
r
u
d

d
b

i

t
s
a
l

e
h
t

f
o

e
m

i
t

e
h
t

t
a

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
t
n
e
m
a
d
n
u
f

P
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

N
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

P
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

N
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

e
c
n
a
l
a
B
a
e
r
A
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

t
s
a
L
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

s
r
u
o
h

k
a
e
p

,
y
a
d
s
r
u
h
T
o
t

y
a
d
n
o
M

r
e
t
n
W

i

0
8
3
.
2

5
9
6
.
8

0
6
6
.
4
-

9
6
9
.
9
2

4
8
5
.
4

8
7
2
.
9
2

5
0
2
.
0
1
7

7
2
9
.
9
4
8

4
6
8
.
6
2
6

4
3
0
.
3
7
3

9
5
5
.
1
0
3
-

4
1
2
.
4
6
2

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
8
8
1
4

0
0
0
.
7
5
5
7
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0
8
1
5

0
0
0
.
0

3
0
0
.
4
8
4
-

0
0
0
.
5
2
1
-

3
1
3
.
2
-

6
4
3
.
8

5
1
7
.
1
8
7

0
0
0
.
5
6
1
4
-

5
5
1
.
1

5
6
1
.
1

6
6
2
.
1

9
4
6
.
0

9
6
0
.
0

6
1
3
.
3
-

0
1
1
.
0
2

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
2
9
.
1
1
-

4
4
8
.
8
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
1
3
.
6
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
7
.
5
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
0
2
.
7
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

3
6
8
.
5
1
6
5

0
7
4
.
1
1
0
3
8

0
7
9
.
1
7
9
8
7

0
6
9
.
5
9
0
5

0
3
3
.
4
3
3
4
3

9
7
2
.
8
5
1
-

1
7
6
.
3
6
1
-

2
5
9
.
7
9
6
3

7
8
3
.
3
1
7

9
4
0
.
2
1
0
3
-

7
4
4
.
0

0
4
9
.
5

0
0
0
.
0

3
2
8
.
2
6
9

8
8
9
.
2
1
-

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

9
7
3
.
0
-

0
4
6
.
0
-

0
9
2
.
9
9
2

0
7
9
.
1
0
1
-

8
3
7
.
6
2

4
1
5
.
1

5
3
5
.
5
1

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
6
2
.
6
5
9
6
1

3
5
6
.
7
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

l
e
v
e
l

%
1
V
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5
V
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1
V
C

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

s
r
u
o
h

k
a
e
p
–
ﬀ
o

,
y
a
d
s
r
u
h
T
o
t

y
a
d
n
o
M

r
e
t
n
W

i

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

0
0
0
.
0
7
6
4

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

2
6
6
.
6
5
2

0
0
0
.
8
8
-

5
4
9
.
3
9
3
-

0
0
0
.
0

8
8
1
.
8
8
4

0
0
5
.
3

3
2
5
.
1
2

2
1
5
.
2
-

3
5
3
.
0
1

9
9
7
.
2
3
6

0
0
0
.
2
1
0
4
-

4
3
9
.
0

8
0
9
.
0

8
7
1
.
1

4
3
6
.
0

2
2
1
.
0

8
7
1
.
0

1
8
9
.
1

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
9
8
.
7
7
9
9
3

1
6
0
.
7
8
0
8

0
0
0
.
0

6
1
9
.
8
1
1

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

6
0
4
.
9
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

4
6
7
.
6
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

9
0
9
.
8
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

9
7
5
.
0
5
1
-

7
3
9
.
6
3
1
-

3
9
6
.
0
2
3
2

2
9
0
.
6
5
4

8
9
2
.
9
3
1
2
-

7
1
0
.
0
-

0
2
6
.
4

0
0
0
.
0

0
7
7
.
7
6
2

9
4
5
.
4
1
-

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
8
0
.
1
-

0
0
3
.
0
-

0
1
8
.
2
5
1

0
5
3
.
0
1
1
-

2
4
3
.
0

9
2
1
.
5

4
2
2
.
0
2

0
0
0
.
0

6
1
0
.
0
1
5

0
0
0
.
7
4
4
2

2
1
8
.
7
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

P
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

N
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

P
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

N
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

e
c
n
a
l
a
B
a
e
r
A
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

t
s
a
L
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

l
e
v
e
l

%
1
V
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5
V
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1
V
C

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

29

:
e
d
u
l
c
n

i

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v
l
a
t
n
e
m
a
d
n
u
f

e
h
T

.
2

l
e
n
a
p

,
)
0
0
:
8
0
–
0
0
:
0
2
(

s
r
u
o
h
k
a
e
p
-
ﬀ
o
d
n
a

1

l
e
n
a
p
n

i

n
w
o
h
s

s
a

,
)
0
0
:
0
2
–
0
0
:
8
0
m
o
r
f
(

s
r
u
o
h
k
a
e
p
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

t
a
e
r
t

e

W

;
r
u
o
h

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
e
c
i
r
p

d
a
e
h
a
-
y
a
d

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

i

e
t
u
n
m
-
5
1

r
o
f

s
e
c
i
r
p

t
s
a
l

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
h

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D
=
”
t
s
a
L
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D
“

t
n
a
l
p

r
e
w
o
p

e
h
t

n

i

d
n
a
m
e
d

f
o

e
t
o
u
q

e
h
T
=
”
e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D
“

;
r
u
o
h

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
e
m
u
l
o
v

t
e
k
r
a
m
g
n
i
c
n
a
l
a
b

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
H
=
”
e
c
n
a
l
a
B
a
e
r
A
l
o
r
t
n
o
C
“

,
c
i
a
t
l
o
v
o
t
o
h
p

d
n
a

d
n
w

i

,
s
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r

f
o

s
t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

e
h
t

n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

”
P
/
N
V
P
a
t
l
e
D
“

d
n
a

”
P
/
N
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D
“

;
6

n
o
i
t
a
u
q
E
n

i

d
e
n
ﬁ
e
d

s
a

,
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
l
i
a
v
a

y
a
d

s
u
o
i
v
e
r
p

e
h
t

n

i

k
c
o
l
c
’
o

2

t
a

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

e
h
t

d
n
a

d
b

i

e
c
i
r
p

t
s
a
l

e
h
t

f
o

e
m

i
t

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

6
8
1
.
2

7
4
2
.
7

6
9
8
.
2
-

4
6
9
.
2
1

3
0
4
.
2

3
7
5
.
9

9
6
4
.
9
9
5

6
1
0
.
6
7
6

2
8
7
.
4
4
3

6
9
2
.
4
1
3

5
8
7
.
7
5
3
-

8
4
4
.
0
9
1

P
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

N
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

P
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0
0
9
2

0
0
0
.
6
2
7
4
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
3
7
4
2

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
6
5
-

6
9
7
.
9
2
3
-

1
2
9
.
1
-

1
1
4
.
6

1
7
5
.
7
0
5

0
0
0
.
7
2
0
3
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
5
8
.
5
3
9
3

0
3
4
.
4
7
0
4
1

8
6
2
.
6
2
0
7

5
8
6
.
6
9
7
2

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

2
6
1
.
0
1
-

5
8
4
.
9
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

6
9
7
.
9
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

2
3
1
.
7
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

3
6
6
.
2
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

9
5
2
.
1

9
4
2
.
1

7
6
4
.
1

2
8
0
.
1

0
8
0
.
0

3
7
3
.
0

6
8
4
.
2

0
0
0
.
0

9
0
9
.
6
8

8
0
9
.
9
9

3
1
3
.
0
3
1

9
6
6
.
4
9
4
3

9
3
9
.
9
2
8
1
-

0
7
6
.
7
7
5

5
5
8
.
0

9
1
6
.
6

0
0
0
.
0

2
1
6
.
7
9
6
1

7
0
9
.
2
1
-

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

0
6
0
.
0
-

0
3
7
.
1
-

0
1
7
.
5
5
2

0
2
8
.
6
5
-

2
9
8
.
2
2

8
8
8
.
3

3
9
4
.
3
3

5
7
8
.
6
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
9
2
9
4
0
1

7
6
5
.
2
-

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

s
r
u
o
h

k
a
e
p
–
ﬀ
o

,
y
a
d
s
r
u
h
T
o
t

y
a
d
n
o
M

r
e
m
m
u
S

f
o

d
n
a

e
c
i
r
p

d
a
e
h
a
-
y
a
d

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

i

e
t
u
n
m
-
5
1

r
o
f

s
e
c
i
r
p

t
s
a
l

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
h

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
d

i

e
h
t

f
o

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

:
5

e
l
b
a
T

.
y
a
d
s
r
u
h
T
–
y
a
d
n
o
M

s
y
a
d

g
n
i
k
r
o
w
r
o
f

,
)
4
1
0
2
/
7
0
/
1
0
–
4
1
0
2
/
4
0
/
1
0
(

e
m

i
t

r
e
m
m
u
s

g
n
i
r
u
d

d
b

i

t
s
a
l

e
h
t

f
o

e
m

i
t

e
h
t

t
a

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
t
n
e
m
a
d
n
u
f

N
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

e
c
n
a
l
a
B
a
e
r
A
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

t
s
a
L
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

s
r
u
o
h

k
a
e
p

,
y
a
d
s
r
u
h
T
o
t

y
a
d
n
o
M

r
e
m
m
u
S

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

a
n

P
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

N
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

0
0
0
.
9

4
4
0
.
9
7
1

0
0
0
.
2
4
1
2

0
0
0
.
0

2
4
1
.
8
8
2

3
5
4
.
2

6
1
9
.
0
1

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

3
1
9
.
5
4
2
-

6
4
8
.
8
4
4

0
0
0
.
9
6
5
2
-

9
4
4
.
2
-

6
2
9
.
8

9
7
9
.
0

5
5
9
.
0

1
9
2
.
1

4
1
7
.
0

7
3
1
.
0

0
1
2
.
0

1
4
9
.
1

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
2
5
.
9
8
1
9

9
4
8
.
2
6
2
6

0
0
0
.
0

5
5
6
.
7
3
1

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

6
6
4
.
9
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

4
8
7
.
6
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
4
0
.
8
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

7
4
5
.
2
7

0
6
7
.
2
8

5
6
0
.
6
8
2
2

3
2
7
.
4
5
4
1
-

7
4
5
.
7
4
4

2
8
1
.
0

0
0
8
.
3

0
0
0
.
0

9
9
7
.
1
8

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
1
3
.
3
1
-

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

9
1
6
.
0
-

0
2
0
.
0

0
1
9
.
2
8

0
1
0
.
5
6
-

8
4
1
.
6
1

7
8
0
.
0

0
3
1
.
4

0
0
0
.
0

9
6
4
.
8
3
1

0
0
0
.
3
4
5
2

2
0
4
.
7
-

3
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

P
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

N
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

e
c
n
a
l
a
B
a
e
r
A
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

t
s
a
L
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

l
e
v
e
l

%
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

30

:
e
d
u
l
c
n

i

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v
l
a
t
n
e
m
a
d
n
u
f

e
h
T

.
2

l
e
n
a
p

,
)
0
0
:
8
0
–
0
0
:
0
2
(

s
r
u
o
h
k
a
e
p
-
ﬀ
o
d
n
a

1

l
e
n
a
p
n

i

n
w
o
h
s

s
a

,
)
0
0
:
0
2
–
0
0
:
8
0
m
o
r
f
(

s
r
u
o
h
k
a
e
p
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

t
a
e
r
t

e

W

;
r
u
o
h

i

g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
e
c
i
r
p

d
a
e
h
a
-
y
a
d

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

i

e
t
u
n
m
-
5
1

r
o
f

s
e
c
i
r
p

t
s
a
l

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
h

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D
=
”
t
s
a
L
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D
“

t
n
a
l
p
r
e
w
o
p
e
h
t
n

i

d
n
a
m
e
d
f
o

e
t
o
u
q
e
h
T
=
”
e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D
“

i

;
r
u
o
h
g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
e
m
u
l
o
v
t
e
k
r
a
m
g
n
i
c
n
a
l
a
b

l
a
c
i
r
o
t
s
i
H
=
”
e
c
n
a
l
a
B
a
e
r
A
l
o
r
t
n
o
C
“

,
c
i
a
t
l
o
v
o
t
o
h
p

d
n
a

d
n
w

i

,
s
e
l
b
a
w
e
n
e
r

f
o

s
t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

e
h
t

n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

”
P
/
N
V
P
a
t
l
e
D
“

d
n
a

”
P
/
N
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D
“

;
6

n
o
i
t
a
u
q
E
n

i

d
e
n
ﬁ
e
d

s
a

,
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
l
i
a
v
a

y
a
d

s
u
o
i
v
e
r
p

e
h
t

n

i

k
c
o
l
c
’
o

2

t
a

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

e
h
t

d
n
a

d
b

i

e
c
i
r
p

t
s
a
l

e
h
t

f
o

e
m

i
t

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
u
o
u
n

i
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

n

i

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

i

e
t
u
n
m
-
5
1

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
d
b

i

e
v
i
t
u
c
e
s
n
o
c

o
w
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

e
c
i
r
p

y
a
d
a
r
t
n

i

e
h
t

f
o

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

:
6

e
l
b
a
T

.
s
r
u
o
h

f
o

r
e
t
r
a
u
q

)
4
–
1
Q
8
1
H
(

k
a
e
p

i

g
n
n
e
v
e

d
n
a

)
4
–
1
Q
2
1
H
(

k
a
e
p

n
o
o
n

,
)
4
–
1
Q
7
H
(

i

g
n
n
r
o
m
g
n
i
r
u
d

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

4

d
e
t
c
e
l
e
s

e

W

i

.
g
n
d
a
r
t

2
Q
2
1
H

8
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
9
6
.
7
6

0
4
3
.
7
4
2
-

9
4
2
.
7

8
3
1
.
8
-

0
6
7
.
1
9
2

1
Q
2
1
H

7
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0
8

0
0
0
.
2
8
2
-

6
0
9
.
6

8
2
3
.
4
1
-

0
8
7
.
4
8
5

4
Q
7
H

8
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
8
9
.
4
8

0
9
7
.
3
7
-

4
0
4
.
6

2
3
7
.
0

9
3
1
.
1
3

3
Q
7
H

7
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
9
2
.
4
7

4
8
2
.
6

7
0
5
.
0
-

9
0
2
.
5
3

0
8
6
.
1
0
1
-

2
Q
7
H

3
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
1
5

0
0
7
.
1
7
-

5
3
3
.
6

0
4
9
.
0
-

4
5
1
.
2
2

1
Q
7
H

2
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
2
6

0
0
9
.
3
7
-

6
0
3
.
5

8
8
2
.
0
-

7
5
5
.
9
2

0
0
0
.
6
6
3
4
9
9
6
1

0
0
0
.
0
8
2
2
3
9
8
6

0
0
4
.
6
0
3
1
6
1

0
0
8
.
3
7
9
0
1
2

0
7
8
.
4
5
2
5
7

0
0
3
.
8
5
3
3
4
1

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

0
0
7
.
3
9
7
6
1
6

0
0
8
.
9
5
8
4
3
1

0
5
7
.
4
3
4
3
9

0
0
6
.
2
1
0
5
6
8

0
0
1
.
8
5
4
7
5
5

0
0
0
.
4
0
1
3
8
8
2

0
0
0
.
0

9
8
7
.
1
4
-

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

2
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

4
Q
8
1
H

0
2
1
.
2
1
1

0
2
1
.
2
1
1
-

9
3
9
.
6

1
5
5
.
1
-

2
1
0
.
8
5

0
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
9
3
-

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

8
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

3
Q
8
1
H

0
0
0
.
4
8

0
9
9
.
5
8
-

0
5
3
.
6

7
8
0
.
0
-

4
6
7
.
8
2

0
0
0
.
0

3
6
3
.
6
2
-

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

0
0
0
.
0

4
3
2
.
9
4
-

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

7
2
8
.
3
3
-

8
9
7
.
6
4
-

4
4
0
.
2
7
-

6
5
7
.
3
5
-

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

l
e
v
e
l

%
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

1
8
7
.
7
3
-

8
9
5
.
7
2
-

7
9
2
.
6
3
-

5
9
8
.
8
3
-

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

2
Q
8
1
H

0
0
9
.
5
5

0
0
0
.
8
6
-

8
8
9
.
5

8
5
3
.
0
-

3
3
4
.
4
2

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
Q
8
1
H

4
0
0
.
0
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
9
9
.
0
1
1

0
0
9
.
1
9
-

7
6
1
.
6

5
7
2
.
2

2
9
0
.
8
6

2
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

2
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

4
Q
2
1
H

0
0
0
.
0
2
1

0
0
0
.
2
9
-

6
7
5
.
6

4
5
7
.
0

0
6
3
.
5
5

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

3
Q
2
1
H

6
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
9
8

0
0
0
.
0
8
1
-

1
1
0
.
8

5
2
7
.
3
-

2
9
8
.
1
2
1

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

l
e
v
e
l

%
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

31

e

W

i

.
g
n
d
a
r
t

s
u
o
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

n

i

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

i

e
t
u
n
m
-
5
1

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
d
b

i

e
v
i
t
u
c
e
s
n
o
c

o
w
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
e
d
a
r
t

e
m
u
l
o
v

e
h
t

f
o

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

:
7

e
l
b
a
T

.
s
r
u
o
h

f
o

r
e
t
r
a
u
q

)
4
–
1
Q
8
1
H
(

k
a
e
p

i

g
n
n
e
v
e

d
n
a

)
4
–
1
Q
2
1
H
(

k
a
e
p

n
o
o
n

,
)
4
–
1
Q
7
H
(

i

g
n
n
r
o
m
g
n
i
r
u
d

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

y
r
e
v
i
l
e
d

4

d
e
t
c
e
l
e
s

2
Q
2
1
H

6
7
9
.
6

0
0
5
.
2

0
0
0
.
5
7

0
0
1
.
0

5
3
7
.
9

7
7
1
.
2

4
7
5
.
8

1
Q
2
1
H

0
0
0
.
5

4
0
0
.
0
1

0
0
9
.
4
3
2

0
0
1
.
0

0
7
7
.
1
1

9
7
9
.
2

8
8
3
.
3
3

4
Q
7
H

9
2
0
.
4
1

0
0
2
.
0
1

3
Q
7
H

4
9
3
.
8

0
0
2
.
5

2
Q
7
H

3
1
2
.
8

0
0
0
.
5

1
Q
7
H

8
4
0
.
5
1

0
0
0
.
2
1

0
0
0
.
0
0
1

0
0
0
.
0
7

0
0
6
.
0
6

0
0
0
.
0
5
1

0
0
1
.
0

5
2
5
.
2
1

4
1
4
.
1

2
6
0
.
6

0
0
1
.
0

6
5
8
.
8

0
2
8
.
1

5
8
4
.
7

0
0
1
.
0

6
7
8
.
8

3
2
8
.
1

9
5
1
.
7

0
0
1
.
0

7
9
8
.
2
1

5
5
4
.
1

6
9
6
.
7

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
4
7
.
3
6
1
0
1

0
0
9
.
8
2
8
4
9
1

1
7
3
.
8
2
5
3

3
0
6
.
8
7
7
6

2
7
6
.
5
1
2
6

8
0
3
.
1
0
2
6

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

9
9
1
.
8
2
-

0
5
0
.
7
3
-

9
6
6
.
4
3
-

9
5
8
.
4
2
-

6
7
1
.
0
3
-

3
8
1
.
3
3
-

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

2
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

l
e
v
e
l

%
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

32

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

4
Q
8
1
H

0
0
0
.
9

8
8
6
.
2
1

0
0
0
.
0
0
2

0
0
1
.
0

9
9
0
.
3
1

2
4
8
.
2

7
0
2
.
6
2

3
Q
8
1
H

2
Q
8
1
H

1
Q
8
1
H

4
Q
2
1
H

3
Q
2
1
H

6
3
1
.
8

0
0
0
.
4

0
0
6
.
5
9
1

0
0
1
.
0

8
2
3
.
0
1

0
0
2
.
3

5
1
8
.
0
3

0
8
4
.
8

0
0
1
.
4

0
0
1
.
0

0
0
5
.
5
9

8
6
3
.
0
1

0
6
9
.
1

3
3
5
.
7

0
9
6
.
3
1

0
0
0
.
0
1

0
0
3
.
6

6
0
6
.
1
1

5
7
9
.
8

0
0
2
.
4

0
0
0
.
9
7
1

0
0
0
.
0
0
1

0
0
0
.
0
0
1

0
0
1
.
0

8
8
7
.
1

6
4
5
.
3
1

0
5
4
.
0
1

0
0
1
.
0

7
1
9
.
2
1

1
6
6
.
1

7
1
7
.
6

0
0
1
.
0

5
4
1
.
1
1

5
4
8
.
1

7
0
0
.
7

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
4
8
9
5
1
1

0
0
5
.
8
0
5
5
6
1

2
2
6
.
5
9
2
7

0
8
8
.
4
7
8
3
1

2
1
2
.
0
5
0
5

5
3
3
.
6
2
0
6

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

0
0
0
.
6
7
8
4

5
2
0
.
7
3
-

7
8
5
.
1
3
-

5
7
7
.
3
3
-

8
5
2
.
4
3
-

7
0
0
.
5
2
-

6
5
1
.
6
2
-

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
S
-
t

t
s
e
t

F
D
A

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

1
3
4
.
3
-

2
6
8
.
2
-

7
6
5
.
2
-

l
e
v
e
l

%
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

l
e
v
e
l

%
0
1

:
e
u
l
a
v

l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

m
u
m
i
x
a
M

n
a
i
d
e
M

n
a
e
M

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

.
v
e
D

.

d
t
S

s
s
e
n
w
e
k
S

s
i
s
o
t
r
u
K

a
r
e
B
-
e
u
q
r
a
J

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

Table 8: Estimation results of the model shown in Equation 7. Global OLS without

threshold

Dependent variable Delta Last Price- Price DayAhedd

Summer oﬀ-peak

Summer peak

Winter oﬀ-peak

Winter peak

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Co

7.388*

DemandQ -7.438*

Balancing

0.007*

DeltaWindP -0.005*

DeltaWindN -0.007*

DeltaPVP

DeltaPVN

–

–

DQ1M

DQ2M

DQ3M

DQ4M

DQ1A

DQ2A

DQ3A

DQ4A

10.170*

3.515*

-6.519*

-10.454*

-13.845*

-6.852*

0.349

4.842*

(1.971)

(2.159)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

–

–

(1.112)

(1.144)

(1.122)

(1.139)

(1.219)

(1.229)

(1.161)

(1.203)

-20.956*

10.929**

0.008*

-0.002**

-0.012*

-0.003*

-0.004*

10.022*

2.192

-1.486

-6.031*

-8.111*

0.268

3.458**

13.132*

(6.128)

(4.852)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(1.462)

(1.507)

(1.463)

(1.622)

(1.539)

(1.374)

(1.341)

(1.451)

14.469*

-12.715*

0.014*

-0.003*

-0.004*

–

–

-4.561*

-5.094*

-3.148

-1.187

3.114

-0.948

-4.578**

-4.568**

(4.762)

(4.605)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

–

–

(1.729)

(1.717)

(1.704)

(1.719)

(1.848)

(1.802)

(1.793)

(1.825)

Coeﬀ

-9.015

-0.354

0.009*

-0.003*

-0.004*

-0.003*

-0.005*

23.808*

11.336*

2.740

-0.548

-6.098*

3.203

16.773*

25.588*

Std. err.

(10.354)

(8.728)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(2.340)

(2.148)

(2.207)

(2.296)

(2.173)

(2.016)

(2.118)

(2.294)

Rsquared

No. Obs.

35.43%

2543

37.99%

2483

28.76%

2447

36.63%

2363

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. * and **, denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at

the 1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively.

33

Table 9: Winter peak, threshold estimation results. Threshold variable: Demand Quote

Threshold estimation (threshold variable DemandQ)

Dependent variable Delta Last Price- Price Dahd

Threshold value

Regime 1

<= 1.058

Regime 2

> 1.058

Co

DemandQ

Balancing

DeltaWindP

DeltaWindN

DeltaPVP

DeltaPVN

DQ1M

DQ2M

DQ3M

DQ4M

DQ1A

DQ2A

DQ3A

DQ4A

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Coeﬀ

-48.973*

26.810**

0.003

-0.004

-0.006**

-0.003

-0.006*

41.322*

21.880*

4.806

2.266

-8.175

8.898

30.651*

45.249*

Std. Err.

(15.527)

(12.806)

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(8.710)

(7.985)

(7.948)

(8.284)

(7.420)

(7.325)

(7.536)

(7.616)

Coeﬀ

63.563*

-61.545*

0.010*

-0.002**

-0.004*

-0.004*

-0.006*

21.500*

10.443*

3.682

0.298

-1.367

3.440

12.192*

17.453*

Std. Err.

(22.987)

(19.412)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(2.324)

(2.129)

(2.205)

(2.329)

(2.340)

(2.207)

(2.235)

(2.369)

48.61%

652

35.93%

1711

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at

the 1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively.

34

Table 10: Estimation results hour 7, Quarters 1–4, global OLS without threshold, entire

sample

OLS estimation of the model including fundamental variables

Dependent variable Delta Price

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Coeﬀ

0.288

-0.208*

-0.157*

-0.084*

DemandQuote

-0.300

Volume

SqrTimeStep

0.008

-0.833

DeltaWindIntrP 0.0001

DeltaWindIntrN-0.001*

DeltaPVIntraP 0.0001

DeltaPVIntraN 0.001

H7Q1

Std. err.

(0.645)

(0.030)

(0.032)

(0.017)

(0.543)

(0.005)

(1.420)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

H7Q2

H7Q3

H7Q4

Coeﬀ

-0.450

-0.320*

-0.159*

-0.080*

0.381

0.015

-1.212

0.0002

0.0001

0.001

0.002**

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

(0.965)

(0.032)

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.829)

(0.009)

(1.359)

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

-1.392

-0.244*

-0.121*

-0.084*

0.966

0.001

4.101*

-0.001

0.0002

0.0002

-0.001

(1.139)

(0.035)

(0.027)

(0.019)

(0.965)

(0.009)

(1.319)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

-1.102

-0.281*

-0.175*

-0.086*

1.011

-0.020*

4.127*

-0.001

0.001

0.002

0.000

(0.858)

(0.033)

(0.020)

(0.016)

(0.736)

(0.006)

(1.547)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

Rsquared

No. Obs.

5.989%

6979

10.930%

4873

7.333%

4977

9.481%

7175

OLS estimation of the autoregressive model, excluding fundamental variables

Dependent variable Delta Price

Coeﬀ

0.004

-0.207*

-0.158*

-0.083*

H7Q1

Std. err.

(0.061)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

5.055%

6979

H7Q2

H7Q3

H7Q4

Coeﬀ

0.005

-0.321*

-0.159*

-0.080*

Std. err.

(0.086)

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.014)

Coeﬀ

0.010

-0.243*

-0.119*

-0.085*

Std. err.

(0.086)

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.014)

Coeﬀ

0.007

-0.276*

-0.175*

-0.082*

Std. err.

(0.072)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

9.718%

4873

6.170%

4977

8.085%

7175

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at the

1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively. The interpretation of variables is: DeltaPrice(x)=lagged price

changes 1–3; DemandQuote=demand quote; Volume=volume of trades; SqrTimeStep=

∆t; DeltaWind-
IntrP/N=positive/negative forecasting errors in wind; DeltaPVIntraP/N=positive/negative forecasting

√

errors in PV.

35

t
i
l
p
S

e
l
p
m
a
S

t
s
r
i
F

,
4
–
1

s
r
e
t
r
a
u
Q

,
7

r
u
o
h

s
t
l

u
s
e
r

n
o
i
t
a
m

i
t
s
E

:
1
1

e
l

b
a
T

4
Q
7
H

3
Q
7
H

2
Q
7
H

1
Q
7
H

e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
D

1

e
m
i
g
e
R

∗
5
1
4
.
1
=
<

∗
8
2
8
.
0
=
<

∗
7
5
7
.
0
=
<

∗
1
6
1
.
1
=
<

e
u
l
a
v

d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
2
2
8
.
0
(

)
0
3
0
.
0
(

)
0
2
0
.
0
(

)
7
1
0
.
0
(

)
0
0
7
.
0
(

)
6
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
7
5
.
1
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

*
*
1
6
5
.
1
-

*
5
5
2
.
0
-

*
9
6
1
.
0
-

*
6
8
0
.
0
-

*
*
6
1
4
.
1

*
8
1
0
.
0
-

*
*
0
2
8
.
3

1
0
0
.
0
-

1
0
0
.
0

*
3
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
9
7
2
.
3
1
(

)
3
8
0
.
0
(

)
5
8
0
.
0
(

)
7
5
0
.
0
(

)
2
5
2
.
7
1
(

)
3
5
0
.
0
(

)
3
3
3
.
2
1
(

)
5
2
0
.
0
(

)
7
0
0
.
0
(

)
4
2
0
.
0
(

)
8
0
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

9
8
6
.
6
1
-

*
1
2
2
.
0
-

7
8
0
.
0
-

5
7
0
.
0
-

9
2
2
.
9
1

1
6
0
.
0
-

*
3
7
8
.
4
4

*
4
3
1
.
0
-

*
*
4
1
0
.
0

7
0
0
.
0

1
1
0
.
0

%
3
5
0
.
9

4
8
9
6

4
Q
7
H

%
7
9
4
.
3
6

1
1
1

3
Q
7
H

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
8
8
6
.
7
(

)
3
7
0
.
0
(

)
4
4
0
.
0
(

)
1
5
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

*
6
1
4
.
6
1

*
*
5
5
1
.
0
-

*
7
8
1
.
0
-

5
0
0
.
0
-

)
6
0
7
.
0
1
(

*
*
0
8
9
.
1
2
-

)
8
0
1
.
0
(

)
4
7
5
.
9
(

)
8
1
0
.
0
(

)
7
1
0
.
0
(

)
3
1
0
.
0
(

)
1
1
0
.
0
(

4
4
0
.
0

0
7
3
.
1

*
6
5
0
.
0
-

3
1
0
.
0
-

1
0
0
.
0

2
1
0
.
0

%
0
6
4
.
7
6

2
8

2
Q
7
H

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
5
6
3
.
1
(

)
6
3
0
.
0
(

)
8
3
0
.
0
(

)
2
2
0
.
0
(

)
3
5
2
.
1
(

)
7
0
0
.
0
(

)
9
5
9
.
1
(

)
0
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
2
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

%
1
8
0
.
6

0
9
0
4

1
Q
7
H

ﬀ
e
o
C

5
6
7
.
0

*
4
8
1
.
0
-

*
3
9
1
.
0
-

*
8
9
0
.
0
-

4
4
8
.
0
-

0
1
0
.
0

4
5
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

e
m
u
l
o
V

P
r
t
n
I
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

N
r
t
n
I
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

P
a
r
t
n
I
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

N
a
r
t
n
I
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

p
e
t
S
e
m
T
r
q
S

i

d
e
r
a
u
q
s
R

.
s
b
O

.
o
N

1
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

2
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

3
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

o
C

2

e
m
i
g
e
R

36

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
3
8
1
.
0
2
1
(

)
5
3
1
.
0
(

)
8
8
0
.
0
(

)
7
4
0
.
0
(

)
9
6
7
.
3
8
(

)
9
3
0
.
0
(

)
0
2
2
.
7
1
(

)
6
3
0
.
0
(

)
6
3
0
.
0
(

)
4
0
0
.
0
(

)
5
5
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

8
3
0
.
8
5
-

*
3
6
3
.
0
-

*
1
3
2
.
0
-

*
*
3
9
0
.
0
-

3
1
7
.
9
3

5
3
0
.
0
-

*
1
0
4
.
3
4

2
5
0
.
0
-

6
0
0
.
0
-

*
9
2
0
.
0
-

7
2
0
.
0
-

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
5
9
0
.
1
(

)
5
3
0
.
0
(

)
0
2
0
.
0
(

)
8
1
0
.
0
(

)
4
1
9
.
0
(

)
9
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
9
2
.
1
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

2
7
1
.
0
-

*
6
3
2
.
0
-

*
9
0
1
.
0
-

*
1
8
0
.
0
-

6
9
0
.
0
-

2
0
0
.
0

*
8
2
5
.
4

1
0
0
.
0
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0
-

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
2
6
0
.
1
(

)
1
3
0
.
0
(

)
2
2
0
.
0
(

)
9
1
0
.
0
(

)
4
0
9
.
0
(

)
9
0
0
.
0
(

)
2
7
3
.
1
(

)
0
0
0
.
0
(

)
0
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

8
6
3
.
0
-

*
8
1
3
.
0
-

*
6
5
1
.
0
-

*
4
8
0
.
0
-

2
0
3
.
0

4
1
0
.
0

5
0
9
.
0
-

0
0
0
.
0

0
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

*
*
2
0
0
.
0

.
r
r
e

.

d
t
S

)
5
0
3
.
1
(

)
0
5
0
.
0
(

)
9
4
0
.
0
(

)
5
2
0
.
0
(

)
3
2
0
.
1
(

)
6
0
0
.
0
(

)
0
3
9
.
1
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

)
2
0
0
.
0
(

)
1
0
0
.
0
(

ﬀ
e
o
C

8
8
3
.
0

*
3
3
2
.
0
-

1
8
0
.
0
-

7
4
0
.
0
-

0
1
2
.
0
-

4
0
0
.
0

4
3
0
.
3
-

1
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

2
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

3
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

o
C

e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

p
e
t
S
e
m
T
r
q
S

i

e
m
u
l
o
V

*
*
2
0
0
.
0
-

P
r
t
n
I
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

1
0
0
.
0
-

1
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

N
r
t
n
I
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

P
a
r
t
n
I
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

N
a
r
t
n
I
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

∗
5
1
4
.
1
>

∗
8
2
8
.
0
>

∗
7
5
7
.
0
>

∗
1
6
1
.
1
>

e
u
l
a
v

d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

,
e
c
n
a
c
ﬁ
n
g
i
s

i

f
o

l
e
v
e
l

%
5

d
n
a

%
1

e
h
t

t
a

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
n
g
i
s

i

y
l
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

s
i

c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

t
s
e
t

a

e
t
o
n
e
d

*
*

d
n
a

,
*

.
s
i
s
e
h
t
n
e
r
a
p

n

i

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
r
o
r
r
e

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

%
4
0
6
.
7
4

1
9
1

%
9
4
3
.
7

0
5
8
4

%
9
5
6
.
0
1

1
9
7
4

%
4
9
0
.
0
1

9
8
8
2

d
e
r
a
u
q
s
R

.
s
b
O

.
o
N

;
s
e
d
a
r
t

f
o

e
m
u
l
o
v
=
e
m
u
l
o
V

;
e
t
o
u
q

d
n
a
m
e
d
=
e
t
o
u
Q
d
n
a
m
e
D

;
3
–
1

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

e
c
i
r
p

d
e
g
g
a
l
=

)
x
(
e
c
i
r
P
a
t
l
e
D

:
s
i

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
t
e
r
p
r
e
t
n

i

e
h
T

.
y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

.

V
P
n

i

s
r
o
r
r
e

g
n
i
t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n
/
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p
=
N
/
P
a
r
t
n
I
V
P
a
t
l
e
D

;

i

d
n
w
n

i

s
r
o
r
r
e

g
n
i
t
s
a
c
e
r
o
f

e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n
/
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p
=
N
/
P
r
t
n
I
d
n
W

i

a
t
l
e
D

;
t

∆

=
p
e
t
S
e
m
T
r
q
S

i

√

Table 12: Estimation results hour 7, Quarters 2,4, Second Sample Split. For Quarter 2 the

second regime identiﬁed in the ﬁrst sample split (Table 11) has been further checked for

threshold eﬀect. For Quarter 4 the observations in regime 1 (Table 11) have been further

checked for threshold eﬀect.
Dependent variable Delta Price

Regime 1

Threshold value

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

DemandQuote

Volume

SqrTimeStep

DeltaWindIntrP

DeltaWindIntrN

DeltaPVIntraP

DeltaPVIntraN

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Regime 2

Threshold value

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

DemandQuote

Volume

SqrTimeStep

DeltaWindIntrP

DeltaWindIntrN

DeltaPVIntraP

DeltaPVIntraN

Rsquared

No. Obs.

H7Q2

<= 1.145∗

H7Q4

<= 1.178∗

Coeﬀ

-4.367

-0.431*

-0.242*

-0.132*

4.051

-0.014

1.178

-0.001*

-0.001

0.000

0.001

Coeﬀ

-0.826

-0.227*

-0.102*

-0.058**

0.536

0.043*

-2.138

0.000

0.000

0.001

0.003*

18.171%

2175

H7Q2

> 1.145∗

Std. err.

(3.103)

(0.041)

(0.032)

(0.029)

(2.847)

(0.013)

(1.807)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.001)

Std. err.

(2.130)

(0.045)

(0.029)

(0.023)

(1.724)

(0.012)

(1.950)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Coeﬀ

-2.411

-0.287*

-0.180*

-0.082*

2.224

-0.019*

4.501*

-0.001

0.000

-0.001

0.002

Coeﬀ

3.845

-0.168*

-0.091*

-0.090

-3.034

-0.013

1.134

-0.002**

0.001

0.006

-0.005*

9.526%

4605

H7Q4

> 1.178∗

Std. err.

(1.412)

(0.036)

(0.023)

(0.019)

(1.284)

(0.007)

(1.694)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.002)

Std. err.

(4.117)

(0.042)

(0.028)

(0.047)

(3.344)

(0.011)

(3.719)

(0.001)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.001)

7.361%

2576

19.427%

1665

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at the

1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively. The interpretation of variables is: DeltaPrice(x)=lagged price

changes 1–3; DemandQuote=demand quote; Volume=volume of trades; SqrTimeStep=

∆t; DeltaWind-
IntrP/N=positive/negative forecasting errors in wind; DeltaPVIntraP/N=positive/negative forecasting

√

errors in PV.

37

Table 13: Estimation results hour 12, Quarters 1–4, global OLS without threshold

OLS estimation of the model including fundamental variables

Dependent variable Delta Price

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

DemandQuote

Volume

SqrTimeStep

Coeﬀ

-0.558

-0.175**

-0.071**

-0.102

0.109

0.053*

0.423

DeltaWindIntrP -0.001*

DeltaWindIntrN -0.001*

DeltaPVIntraP -0.002**

DeltaPVIntraN

0.000

H12Q1

Std. err.

(0.672)

(0.086)

(0.032)

(0.060)

(0.499)

(0.019)

(1.570)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.001)

H12Q2

H12Q3

H12Q4

Coeﬀ

-0.674

-0.167*

-0.040

-0.018

0.408

0.012

1.868

-0.001

-0.001

-0.002**

-0.001

Std. err.

(0.977)

(0.043)

(0.023)

(0.017)

(0.755)

(0.009)

(1.365)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Coeﬀ

-0.111

-0.207*

-0.077**

-0.039

0.156

-0.012

1.010

-0.001*

-0.001

-0.002**

-0.002**

Std. err.

(0.765)

(0.038)

(0.036)

(0.021)

(0.578)

(0.009)

(1.348)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Coeﬀ

-0.032

-0.140*

-0.079*

-0.020

0.088

-0.013**

1.683

-0.001*

-0.002**

-0.004*

-0.002**

Std. err.

(0.799)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.013)

(0.635)

(0.006)

(1.853)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Rsquared

No. Obs.

7.296%

6859

4.705%

5449

7.011%

6558

8.411%

7931

OLS estimation of the autoregressive model excluding fundamental variables

Dependent variable Delta Price

H12Q1

H12Q2

H12Q3

H12Q4

Coeﬀ

0.006

-0.172*

-0.065*

-0.099*

Std. err.

(0.077)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

Coeﬀ

0.004

-0.167*

-0.041*

-0.018

Std. err.

(0.099)

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.014)

Coeﬀ

0.005

-0.206*

-0.077*

-0.041*

Std. err.

(0.092)

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.012)

Coeﬀ

0.003

-0.137*

-0.078*

-0.019

Std. err.

(0.066)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

3.715%

6859

2.733%

5449

4.219%

6558

2.187%

7931

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at the

1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively. The interpretation of variables is: DeltaPrice(x)=lagged price

changes 1–3; DemandQuote=demand quote; Volume=volume of trades; SqrTimeStep=

∆t; DeltaWind-
IntrP/N=positive/negative forecasting errors in wind; DeltaPVIntraP/N=positive/negative forecasting

√

errors in PV.

38

Table 14: Estimation results hour 12, Quarters 1–4, First Sample Split

Dependent variable Delta Price

Regime 1

H12Q1

Threshold value

<= 1.245∗

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Coeﬀ

-0.669

-0.202

-0.065

-0.099

DemandQuote

0.163

Volume

0.070**

SqrTimeStep

-1.363

DeltaWindIntrP 0.000

DeltaWindIntrN -0.001

DeltaPVIntraP -0.003*

DeltaPVIntraN 0.001

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Regime 2

Threshold value

Co

Coeﬀ

0.125

DeltaPrice1

-0.094**

DeltaPrice2

-0.108

DeltaPrice3

-0.099**

DemandQuote

-0.216

Volume

0.018**

SqrTimeStep

1.140

DeltaWindIntrP -0.002*

DeltaWindIntrN -0.001*

DeltaPVIntraP 0.000

DeltaPVIntraN -0.001

Std. err.

(1.982)

(0.118)

(0.043)

(0.078)

(1.685)

(0.028)

(2.119)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

9.155%

3911

H12Q1

> 1.245∗

Std. err.

(1.349)

(0.040)

(0.040)

(0.043)

(0.965)

(0.008)

(1.439)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.001)

H12Q2

<= 1.245∗

H12Q3

<= 1.146∗

H12Q4

<= 1.197∗

Coeﬀ

-0.693

-0.126*

-0.042**

-0.010

0.518

0.022

-0.205

0.000

-0.001

-0.003*

-0.001

Std. err.

(3.302)

(0.043)

(0.021)

(0.018)

(2.798)

(0.012)

(1.886)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Coeﬀ

0.421

-0.191**

-0.142

-0.023

0.036

-0.007

-9.905

0.005*

-0.006*

-0.007**

-0.002

Std. err.

(2.418)

(0.075)

(0.085)

(0.078)

(2.104)

(0.029)

(5.560)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.003)

(0.002)

Coeﬀ

0.365

-0.108*

-0.082**

-0.030

-0.378

0.003

0.880

-0.001

0.002

-0.002

-0.003*

Std. err.

(3.418)

(0.031)

(0.040)

(0.017)

(3.069)

(0.016)

(2.436)

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

3.806%

3052

H12Q2

> 0.757∗

27.371%

487

H12Q3

> 1.146∗

7.764%

2438

H12Q4

> 1.197∗

Coeﬀ

-1.036

-0.256*

-0.046

-0.035

0.630

-0.006

3.942**

-0.002**

-0.002**

-0.001

-0.002**

Std. err.

(1.809)

(0.060)

(0.053)

(0.035)

(1.304)

(0.013)

(1.758)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Coeﬀ

-0.037

-0.208*

-0.072

-0.039

0.065

-0.012

2.263

-0.001*

-0.001

-0.002**

-0.001

Std. err.

(0.928)

(0.040)

(0.038)

(0.022)

(0.693)

(0.010)

(1.191)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Coeﬀ

0.405

-0.155*

-0.075

-0.011

-0.163

-0.021*

-0.097

-0.001

-0.002**

-0.002**

-0.004*

Std. err.

(0.944)

(0.022)

(0.020)

(0.018)

(0.692)

(0.006)

(1.700)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Rsquared

No. Obs.

8.868%

2948

10.760%

2397

6.590%

6071

11.624%

5493

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at the

1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively. The interpretation of variables is: DeltaPrice(x)=lagged price

changes 1–3; DemandQuote=demand quote; Volume=volume of trades; SqrTimeStep=

∆t; DeltaWind-
IntrP/N=positive/negative forecasting errors in wind; DeltaPVIntraP/N=positive/negative forecasting

√

errors in PV.

39

Table 15: Estimation results hour 18, Quarters 1–4, global OLS without threshold

OLS estimation of the model including fundamental variables

Dependent variable Delta Price

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Coeﬀ

-0.156

-0.206*

-0.163*

-0.131*

DemandQuote

0.324

Volume

SqrTimeStep

DeltaWindIntrP

-0.025*

0.143

0.000

DeltaWindIntrN -0.003*

DeltaPVIntraP

0.011

DeltaPVIntraN -0.014**

H18Q1

Std. err.

(0.809)

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.024)

(0.642)

(0.004)

(1.319)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.009)

(0.007)

H18Q2

H18Q3

H18Q4

Coeﬀ

0.068

-0.276*

-0.149*

-0.090*

0.186

-0.028*

-1.628

0.000

-0.001

-0.006

0.004

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

(0.941)

(0.036)

(0.025)

(0.024)

(0.772)

(0.006)

(1.062)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.013)

(0.011)

-1.861

-0.254*

-0.173*

-0.101*

1.274

0.041*

-0.233

-0.001*

-0.001

-0.004

-0.012

(0.980)

(0.033)

(0.030)

(0.020)

(0.806)

(0.007)

(0.921)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.011)

(0.027)

-1.160

-0.214*

-0.105*

-0.149*

0.708

0.037*

-3.565*

0.000

-0.001

-0.055

0.087

(1.087)

(0.036)

(0.023)

(0.045)

(0.908)

(0.005)

(1.258)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.033)

(0.105)

Rsquared

No. Obs.

11.135%

8507

8.929%

5982

8.048%

6162

7.037%

8936

OLS estimation of the autoregressive model excluding fundamental variables

Dependent variable Delta Price

H18Q1

H18Q2

H18Q3

H18Q4

Coeﬀ

-0.005

-0.201*

-0.163*

-0.131*

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

(0.058)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

-0.001

-0.276*

-0.146*

-0.088*

(0.073)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.013)

Coeﬀ

0.005

-0.252*

-0.170*

-0.098*

Std. err.

(0.082)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.013)

Coeﬀ

0.005

-0.207*

-0.100*

-0.144*

Std. err.

(0.078)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.010)

6.099%

8507

7.715%

5982

7.247%

6162

5.859%

8936

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at the

1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively. The interpretation of variables is: DeltaPrice(x)=lagged price

changes 1–3; DemandQuote=demand quote; Volume=volume of trades; SqrTimeStep=

∆t; DeltaWind-
IntrP/N=positive/negative forecasting errors in wind; DeltaPVIntraP/N=positive/negative forecasting

√

errors in PV.

40

Table 16: Estimation results hour 18, Quarters 1–4, First Sample Split

Dependent variable Delta Price

Regime 1

H18Q1

Threshold value

<= 0.915∗

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Coeﬀ

46.694

-0.510*

-0.284*

-0.137

Std. err.

(152.240)

(0.116)

(0.105)

(0.086)

DemandQuote

-52.391

(170.802)

Volume

SqrTimeStep

-0.051

6.124

DeltaWindIntrP 0.019

DeltaWindIntrN -0.027

DeltaPVIntraP -0.340

DeltaPVIntraN 0.159

Rsquared

No. Obs.

Regime 2

Threshold value

Co

DeltaPrice1

DeltaPrice2

DeltaPrice3

Coeﬀ

0.460

-0.181*

-0.161*

-0.119*

DemandQuote

-0.165

Volume

-0.025*

SqrTimeStep

-0.212

DeltaWindIntrP 0.000

DeltaWindIntrN -0.003*

DeltaPVIntraP 0.012

DeltaPVIntraN -0.014**

(0.085)

(19.295)

(0.026)

(0.020)

(0.224)

(0.321)

30.618%

133

H18Q1

> 0.915∗

Std. err.

(0.670)

(0.025)

(0.035)

(0.023)

(0.526)

(0.004)

(1.319)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.009)

(0.007)

H18Q2

<= 1.221∗

H18Q3

<= 1.219∗

H18Q4

<= 1.442∗

Coeﬀ

0.020

-0.258*

-0.197*

-0.079**

0.296

-0.038*

-1.137

0.000

-0.001

0.038

0.024

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

(2.024)

(0.035)

(0.030)

(0.031)

(1.758)

(0.008)

(1.179)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.052)

(0.029)

-5.932*

-0.252*

-0.154*

-0.111*

4.995*

0.041*

-0.772

-0.001*

0.000

-0.006

-0.036

(2.012)

(0.032)

(0.028)

(0.029)

(1.757)

(0.008)

(1.032)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.014)

(0.045)

-0.481

-0.198*

-0.088*

-0.148*

0.142

0.035*

-3.303*

0.000

-0.001

-0.053

0.086

(1.031)

(0.037)

(0.022)

(0.049)

(0.855)

(0.005)

(1.266)

(0.000)

(0.001)

(0.032)

(0.106)

8.668%

3571

H18Q2

> 1.221∗

8.109%

3553

H18Q3

> 1.219∗

6.356%

8776

H18Q4

> 1.442∗

Coeﬀ

0.944

-0.284*

-0.095*

-0.098*

-0.568

-0.008

-3.076

-0.001

-0.002**

-0.010

-0.008

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

Coeﬀ

Std. err.

(2.590)

(0.064)

(0.039)

(0.035)

(1.970)

(0.012)

(1.815)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.015)

(0.013)

-1.882

-0.247*

-0.171*

-0.106*

1.163

0.042*

0.507

0.000

-0.002*

-0.019

0.005

(3.752)

(0.061)

(0.055)

(0.029)

(2.876)

(0.014)

(1.533)

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.014)

(0.031)

-10.224

(43.509)

0.008

-0.090

-0.011

(1.892)

(0.990)

(0.992)

-39.818

(57.807)

0.156

(0.506)

-48.774

(122.258)

0.000

0.204

0.332

-2.765

(0.043)

(0.301)

(7.980)

(8.155)

Rsquared

No. Obs.

11.003%

8299

11.252%

2411

9.295%

2397

25.624%

160

Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. *, and ** denote a test statistic is statistically signiﬁcant at the

1% and 5% level of signiﬁcance, respectively. The interpretation of variables is: DeltaPrice(x)=lagged price

changes 1–3; DemandQuote=demand quote; Volume=volume of trades; SqrTimeStep=

∆t; DeltaWind-
IntrP/N=positive/negative forecasting errors in wind; DeltaPVIntraP/N=positive/negative forecasting

√

errors in PV.

41

