Integrated European Intra-Day Electricity Market: Rules, Modeling and Analysis

Le Hong Lama,b,∗, Valentin Ileaa, Cristian Bovoa

aDepartment of Energy, Politecnico di Milano, Via La Masa, 34, 20156 Milano, Italy
bFaculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology - The University of Danang, Danang, Vietnam

Abstract

Currently, the coupling of the European Electricity Markets has been fully achieved for the Day-Ahead Market. In the
same time, a joint integrated Intra-Day Market based on the Continuous Trading mechanism is under implementation
and it involves countries from West of Europe. However, some countries (e.g.
Italy and Iberian countries) use the
Discrete Auction mechanism and their integration implies the harmonization of the two trading mechanisms. A Hybrid
Mechanism that represents the coordination of Continuous Trading and Discrete Auction has been discussed with two
concrete proposals being made by Italy and Iberian countries. Thus, the aim of this paper is to propose an advanced
algorithm which can simulate the clearing of the integrated European Intra-Day Market with any levels of coordination
between Discrete Auction and Continuous Trading. The proposed model is formulated as a Mixed Integer Linear Problem
and incorporates all market rules of both mechanisms. The algorithm is ﬂexible enough to adapt to future changes. In
addition, a case study that considers the current and near future market participants and covers an entire day of an
Intra-Day Market is run by an iterative process to investigate the impact of the hybrid Intra-Day Market model on the
Iberian countries and Italy according to their proposals. Moreover, the test cases represent realistic data in terms of
number of variables and constraints, and in terms of complexity of the bids. The results of the paper show that, on one
hand, the proposed market clearing model can be applied for diﬀerent levels of Continuous Trading and Discrete Auction
coordination and, on the other hand, the integration into the single European Intra-Day Market of Italy and Iberian
countries can be beneﬁcial for them. Therefore, the general conclusion is that the proposed market clearing model can
be successfully used by the Power Exchanges currently integrated to solve the market or by the Power Exchanges not
yet integrated to evaluate the impact of their future integration. On the other hand, the model can easily cope with
any further changes in the market rules and represents a tool for future research, e.g. analysis of market participants
behavior in future scenarios or evaluation of various ﬁnancial instruments to manage the congestion of intra-border
interconnectors.

Keywords: XBID project, European Intra-Day Market, Continuous Trading, Discrete Auction.

Highlights

ATC

Available Transfer Capacity

(cid:136) proposes a model achieving complete integration of

BO

Block Order

European Intra-Day Market rules.

CTMA Continuous Trading Matching Algorithm

(cid:136) the model can sustain any level of integration of mar-

kets with diﬀerent rules.

CT

Continuous Trading

(cid:136) the results conﬁrm the near-future developments of

CRA Complementary Regional Auction

the actual market.

(cid:136) the building block for evaluating the future evolution

of the market is provided.

Acronyms

DA

Discrete Auction

DAM Day-Ahead Market

DPM Data Processing Module

FOK Fill-Or-Kill

AEP

Average Electricity Price

GCT Gate Closure Time

AON All-Or-Nothing

∗Corresponding author
Email address: honglam.le@polimi.it (Le Hong Lam)

GFS

Good-For-Session

GTD Good-Till-Date

IOC

Immediate-Or-Cancel

Preprint submitted to Applied Energy

January 5, 2019

IO

Iceberg Order

IDM Intra-Day Market

MO

Multi-period Order

MSO Market Sweep Order

OM Optimization Module

PX

Power Exchange

RES

Renewable Energy Source

SOB

Share Order Book

SO

Single period Order

SW Social Welfare

TS

Trading Session

TSO

Transmission System Operator

TV

Trading Volume

VWAP Volume Weighted Average Price

Nomenclature

l ∈ ls

Set of interconnectors subject to the same
group constraint.

Sets of Orders

s ∈ Sa

Set of single period orders in area a, in which
Ss
a is the subset of supply orders and Sd
a
is the subset of demand orders, with Sa =
a ∪ Sd
Ss
a.

io ∈ IOa

Set of iceberg orders in area a, where IOa ⊆
Sa.

ic ∈ io

Set of clips belonging to an iceberg order io.

lk ∈ LKa

m ∈ Ma

Set of linked orders in area a, where LKa ⊆
Sa.

Set of multi-period orders in area a, where
Ma = M Sa ∪ Ba .

b ∈ Ba

Set of block orders in area a.

ms ∈ M Sa

Set of market sweep orders in area a,
which M Ss
and M Sd
with M Sa = M Ss

in
a is the subset of supply orders
a is the subset of demand orders,
a ∪ M Sd
a.

Parameters

Sets

a ∈ A

a ∈ Ap

t ∈ T

Set of bidding areas.

Set of bidding areas participating in the cur-
rent CT session, where Ap ⊆ A.

Rt,U
l/ls, Rt,D

l/ls

including h ∈ T h (set of
Set of periods,
hourly periods), hh ∈ T hh
h (set of half-hourly
periods), q ∈ T q
hh (set of quarter-hourly pe-
riods), with t = (h, hh, q), T = T h ∪ T hh
h ∪
T q
hh. Here, each hour h includes two half-
hours hh and each half hour includes two
quarter-hours q.

Bic,t
io

The value of submitted quantity Q is posi-
tive for demand side and negative for supply
side.

Hourly ramping energy up and down of sin-
gle interconnector or line set in period t, in
MWh/h, where Rt,U

l/ls ∈ (cid:60)+; Rt,D

l/ls ∈ (cid:60)−.

Binary parameter indicating the accepted
status of iceberg clip ic in period t, it equals
1 if the iceberg clip is fully accepted, 0 oth-
erwise.

t ∈ Tp

Set of periods considered in the current CT
session, where Tp ⊆ T .

Sets of Interconnectors

l ∈ Brl

l ∈ Brp
l

Set of interconnectors including BrAC
and
BrDC
(the set of AC and DC interconnec-
l
tors), respectively; where Brl = BrAC
∪
BrDC
. Element l is deﬁned by connected
l
areas f a ∈ A and ta ∈ A. The power ﬂow
is positively deﬁned from f a to ta.

l

l

Subset of interconnectors considered in the
current CT session, where Brp
∪
BrDC,p
l ⊆ Brl.
l

l = BrAC,p

, Brp

l

ls ∈ LS

Set of all line sets ls.

Brl,max/min

t

Maximum and minimum capacity of inter-
conector l in MWh.

Penality coeﬃcient for interconnector l in
e/MWh.

The power ﬂow of previous CT in intercon-
nector l, equals zero for the ﬁrst CT.

Incidence matrix of iceberg order io and ice-
berg clip ic. Thus, the km − th element of
IM ic
io is 1 if k ∈ io is iceberg order in the ic
clip.

Incidence matrix of link order lk and parent
orders lo. Thus, the km − th element of
IM lk
is 1 if k ∈ s is the parent of lk ∈ LKa,
s
otherwise is null.

ct
l

f t,int
l

IM ic
io

IM lk
s

2

lossl

Qm, Pm

Qt

s, P t
s

Losses coeﬃcient of interconnector l in per-
centages with respect to the transmitted power.

Submitted quantity and price of multiple
period order, in MWh and e/MWh, respec-
tively.

Submitted quantity and price of single pe-
riod order in dispatch period t, in MWh and
e/MWh, respectively.

Rmin
s

, Rmin
m

The minimum accepted ratio of order s, m,
in p.u.

m, T e
T s
m

s, T i
T i
m

s , T r
T r
m

U t,s

m , U t,e
m

Starting and ending period of multiple pe-
riod order m, respectively.

Incoming time of single period order s, mul-
tiple period order m in minutes since con-
tinuous trading has started.

Removing time of single period order s, mul-
tiple period order m in minutes since con-
tinuous trading has started.

Starting and ending unit step of multiple
period order m in dispatch period t. Here,
its value is equal to 1 if t ≥ T s
m) an 0
otherwise.

m(> T e

Continuous Variables

s, xt
xt
m

P t
a

f t
l

f t,+/−
l

Accepted ratio of single s and multi m pe-
riods order.

Net position of area a in period t in MWh.

Power ﬂow in interconnector l in period t in
MWh, where l ∈ (cid:60).

Positive and negative power ﬂow in inter-
connector l in period t in MWh, where f t,+
∈
(cid:60)+ and f t,−

∈ (cid:60)−.

l

l

Binary Variables

Ym

Y t
s

Status of multi-period order m, it equals 1
if accepted.

Status of single period order s in period t,
it equals 1 if accepted.

1. Introduction

The European Directive 2009/28/EC [1] mandated that,
by 2020, 20% of the EU ﬁnal energy consumption should
be produced from Renewable Energy Sources (RESs) while
10% of the European Union energy consumption in trans-
port should be produced from RESs. Generally, this has
the positive eﬀect of having a drastic reduction of pol-
lution levels. However, the high share of RES, such as

3

the wind and solar energy, also negatively impacts on the
power system operation: the inherent ﬂuctuations of RES
increase the power imbalance of the system. Tradition-
ally, at national level, one way to mitigate this is by using
a short-term, close to time of dispatch electricity market:
the Intra-Day Market (IDM). This market allows the ad-
justment of the quantities cleared in the Day-Ahead Mar-
ket (DAM) to a proﬁle closer to the real time operation.

Already, the DAM in Europe is operated as a single
integrated market where the following Power Exchanges
(PXs) participate [2]: APX (Netherlands and United King-
dom), Belpex (Belgium), EPEX Spot (France, Germany
and Austria), GME (Italy), Nordpool Spot (Scandinavian
and Baltic Countries), OMIE (Iberian), OPCOM (Roma-
nia), TGE (Poland), and OTE (Czech Republic). The
operation of the European DAM is showing numerous ben-
eﬁts, e.g for GME [3].

In turn, a guideline on Capacity Allocation and Con-
gestion Management for the European IDM was estab-
lished on 24th July, 2015 [4] and it represented the ﬁrst
step towards the integrated European IDM.

Moreover, the European Commission has established
an European Target Model to achieve the Internal En-
ergy Market in which the Cross-Border Intra-Day Market
Project (abbreviated XBID project) is representative for
the European IDM [5], and is based on the Continuous
Trading (CT) mechanism and implicit auction [6]. Here,
market participants submitting the orders in one country
can be matched by orders submitted in any other countries
as long as transmission capacity is available and they are
remunerated using the pay-as-bid mechanism.

In order to operate the integrated IDM in Europe, a
proposal developed by all Transmission System Operators
(TSOs) and PXs is presented in [7]. As in [6], the opera-
tion of integrated IDM is based on the Continuous Trading
market design, and the market clearing algorithm is called
the Continuous Trading Matching Algorithm (CTMA).
The CTMA, executed for each Trading Session (TS), con-
tains three major steps: (i) maximize economic surplus,
(ii) update the submitted bids database, known as Share
Order Book (SOB), and (iii) re-calculate available capac-
ity. In order to ensure the fair and orderly price formation
for all products, the price-time-priority is also adopted and
the requirements of CTMA are detailed in [8]. Here, as in
the other documents [5, 6, 7], only the speciﬁcations of
CTMA are given in general terms, while the actual math-
ematical model is not shown.

Until the beginning of 2018, the PXs already operat-
ing in the integrated European IDM were EPEX Spot,
Nordpool Spot, Belpex, APX. Particularly, Switzerland is
a part of this project while it does not participate in the
integrated European DAM project. Moreover, up to this
point, the European IDM was operated in CT but this
has become complex as there are countries (e.g. Italy and
Iberian countries) which have a national IDM operated
in Discrete Auctions (DAs), i.e similarly to the DAM but
with a shorter time horizon. Thus, the integration of these

countries would require that they shift to the CT mech-
anism, but this is very diﬃcult to achieve in a short to
medium time horizon due to the dramatic change in the
regulatory framework it would require. Therefore, a hy-
brid market structure where both mechanisms coexists is
the solution to fully achieve the integrated European IDM
in the short-time horizon. In fact, Italy and Iberian coun-
tries, both operating in DAs based national IDM, proposed
in 2017 two hybrid mechanism [9, 10] for their integration
into the European IDM: (i) one very close to their national
IDM structure, for a fast integration, and (ii) one closer
to the CT mechanism, for a fuller integration. Since June
12th 2018, the Iberian countries are integrated using the
ﬁrst option [11], while Italy is still not integrated. How-
ever, up to now, no oﬃcial document has discussed the
hybrid market structure in terms of mathematical model
nor the impact of the hybrid market structure has been
analyzed, e.g. the eﬀects of the two options proposed by
Italy and Iberian countries.

The up-to-date research dealing with the coupling of
IDM in Europe is mostly related to statistical analysis of
the historical data and treats poorly the modeling of the
CTMA. These research papers can be arranged into two
major categories: (i) papers investigating the CT based
structure of IDM [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17] and (ii) papers
forecasting possible scenarios for the future European IDM
[18, 19, 20].

The articles [12] and [13] analyze deeply about the mar-
ket behaviors in CT for the ELBAS 1 market and for Span-
ish market using historical data. These papers state that
the RES penetration impacts signiﬁcantly on the bidding
strategy of the players: due to the DA in Spain, the players
will bid such that a high balancing reserve will be required
while the players in ELBAS prefer submitting bids close
to the delivering time because of the operation of CT. An
interesting paper published by Hagemann and Weber in
[14] presents an analytical model to investigate the eﬀect
of stochastic sources on the liquidity of IDM using mar-
ket data of 2012 and 2013. This paper draws two main
conclusions: (i) in France and Denmark only the biggest
companies can trade in CT, while the players in Germany
are more homogeneous and (ii) the design of DA is not
the cause of the high trading volume in the market but
the market peculiarities are.

Papers [15] and [16] investigate the impact of quarterly-
hour oﬀers in both DA and CT of the German IDM. Pa-
per [15] analyses the result of the implementation of the
quarterly-hour oﬀer in DA, while paper [16] investigates
the impact of quarterly-hour oﬀers through the 15 min-
utes electricity price in CT on the bidding behavior of
RES plants. These papers show clear evidence that the
behavior of the market is improved because of the imple-
mentation of quarterly hour oﬀers, with a great increment

1ELBAS is the IDM formed by all Scandinavian and Baltic coun-

tries.

of Trading Volume (TV), a growth of ﬂexibility in the mar-
ket and a smoothed electricity price. Once again, paper
[17] emphasizes the important role of IDM in mitigating
the imbalance risk exposure of RESs using the German
IDM, however, this paper is limited by a domestic view,
an approximated exchange of energies between countries,
and a simpliﬁed forecast error modeling.

Paper [18] estimates the gaining from the market inte-
gration using the extrapolating ACER’s partial coverage
methodology and the real data from 2012 to 2014. Here,
the beneﬁt of the single market is very clear since it adds
1.3 bn e/year in the IDM and balancing market. At the
same time, the authors indicate two major issues: (i) a
non-suﬃcient capacity of interconnectors and (ii) the ur-
gency to ﬁnd a shared solution for balancing and reserve.
Paper [19] presents a set of policy recommendations for
the future electricity market design considering the high
share of RESs in Europe, in line with the European tar-
get. Here, two principles which support the continuous
trading mechanism of the integrated European IDM are
Principle 1-correct the market failures as close as possible
to their source, relying on subsidiarity as much as possible
and Principle 2-allow for appropriate cross-country vari-
ation in market design across European Member States
rather than a one-size-ﬁts-all-solution.

In general, the tools used to perform the analysis in
the above papers, e.g. the forecasting models in [14, 17]
or statistic models in [15, 16, 18], are diﬀerent in nature
with respect to a market clearing algorithm. They require
such an algorithm to represent the market rules, but they
use very simpliﬁed ones.

According to the well-informed knowledge of the au-
thors, there is only one work, [20], which is related to the
CTMA. This paper only proposes the automatic matching
process to update the remaining capacity of interconnec-
tors in each TS and it does not consider the complexity of
CTMA when it comes to modeling various types of bids
present in IDM. Moreover, the DA mechanism and its
coordination with the CT are not considered. The paper
concludes that the CT can sensibly increase the welfare.
In particular, this conclusion is derived from a simple ex-
ample which is not compatible with the complexity of the
European market topology, thus it is too far when com-
pared to the full requirements of the single European IDM
[8].

Therefore, as of today, there is no research that pro-
poses a complete and detailed mathematical model for
solving the integrated European IDM. Last but not least,
the reader may argue that in literature there are many pa-
pers dealing with market clearing algorithms, e.g [21, 22,
23] to name a few. However, these papers deal with the
DAM which is a very diﬀerent approach with respect to
the IDM. With particular reference to the European case,
the DAM model is solved only one time per day and its
main challenge is the non-convexity of the bids due to the
market rules of block orders, Minimum Income Condition
orders, National Uniform Price orders. Meanwhile, the

4

European IDM model is dealing with diﬀerent characteris-
tics in terms of market designs and market rules, i.e. solv-
ing the market dynamically and the DA-CTcoordination.
In detail, the non-convexity of block orders is dealt in the
IDM by introducing the pay-as-bid mechanism in CT and
by not considering some types of bids, like the National
Uniform Price orders. Moreover, particular types of bids
not present in the DAM are considered in the IDM, like the
Market Sweep Orders, along with speciﬁc CT restrictions,
namely the execution and the validity restrictions. These,
together with more stringent computation time require-
ments (10 minutes for DAM [24] against a few seconds for
CT [8]) determine the use of a diﬀerent approach to model
the European IDM.

It is clear from the previous paragraphs that there is a
complete lack of information regarding the mathematical
representation of the market clearing model for the Eu-
ropean IDM, similar to the EUPHEMIA [21, 25] for the
European DAM. Moreover, such representation is manda-
tory to correctly analyze various aspects of the market,
such as market player behavior dynamics or the impact of
the evolution of the generation sources. For these reasons,
the aim of this paper is to:

(cid:136) Propose an advanced optimization model which can
simulate the DA, CT and the DA-CT coordination
containing all the market rules (order types, net-
work constraints, etc.) encountered across Europe
and able to cope with the future integration of DA
market areas into the single European IDM and, in
general, the evolution of the market;

(cid:136) Investigate the impact of various hybrid mechanisms
(e.g. [9] and [10]) on the operation of the single Eu-
ropean IDM using a realistic study case in terms of
number of bids, type of bids and network, that rep-
resents the near-future evolution of the market.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes
the current IDM in Europe, Section 3 presents the mathe-
matical model. Next, Section 4 not only presents the detail
of two proposals [9] and [10] but also proposes an iterative
process to run a whole length of IDM in one day. Then,
the results and their discussions are shown in Section 5.
Finally, the relevant conclusions are illustrated in Section
6.

2. State-of-the-art of the Intra-Day Market in Eu-

rope

2.1. Market design

In Europe, two IDM mechanisms are currently used by
PXs: CT and DA. The GME and OMIE use DA, while
the rest of the European PXs rely on CT, except Germany
who uses both.

The CT means that the trade can be settled whenever
the oﬀer arrives (through a TS) and the price-time priority

rule is applied: if the submitted price of orders is the same,
the priority is given to the earliest submitted order. The
latest time before a TS for players to submit the bids is
the Gate Closure Time (GCT) that is deﬁned by PXs, e.g
30 minutes for France, Germany, Austria, 5 minutes for
Belgium and Netherlands, 60 minutes for Switzerland and
for cross-border exchange [26], 45 minutes for ELBAS, 20
minutes for exchanges between ELBAS and Germany [27].
The bid which can not be executed has the possibility to
enter the SOB where all available bids are located and wait
for the next TS. The time validity of a TS. i.e. the time
window for which the clearing is performed, is deﬁned by
the market operator. In general, for CT, the time validity
of the TS has its upper limit at the end of the day [14],
while the lower limit is given by the GCT.

The DA is cleared by the marginal pricing rule in sev-
eral auctions held at ﬁxed points in time: seven for GME2
[28], six for OMIE3 [29] and one for Germany [30].

The major advantage of CT [12] is that it allows market
players to trade whenever they can as long as the trading
capacity of interconnectors is suﬃcient; it thus minimizes
the expected energy imbalance in a very short time-frame.
Meanwhile, the DA is characterized by a large distance
from closing time to delivery time, but it has higher TV
than that in CT [13].

Obviously, the diﬀerent designs of IDMs in Europe
means that harmonizing them into a single European IDM
is a major challenge: each design has its own advantages
and is very diﬃcult for the PXs to perform market rules
changes. Therefore, as with the European DAM, the Eu-
ropean IDM will be a uniﬁed platform of heterogeneous
market rules rather than a homogeneous market with sim-
ple rules.

2.2. Type of orders

Orders greatly diﬀer between various PXs. According
to [7], two major types of orders can be distinguished:
(i) Single period Order (SO) and (ii) Multi-period Or-
der (MO). SOs are deﬁned for only one period such as
hourly, half-hourly, quarter-hourly, meanwhile, MOs are
deﬁned for several consecutive hourly periods. The orders
can be entered without any execution restriction (oﬃcial
acronym: NON [31, 7]) or with only one execution re-
striction such as Fill-Or-Kill (FOK), Immediate-Or-Cancel
(IOC) and All-Or-Nothing (AON), and together with or
without the validity restrictions: Good-For-Session (GFS)
or Good-Till-Date (GTD).

Table 1 resumes the major diﬀerences between the ex-
ecution restrictions in terms of accepted quantity and pos-
sibility to enter SOB if the order can not be matched in
the current TS. The order which can not be executed and
can not enter the SOB will not appear in the next TS.

2Each DA of GME is denoted from MI1 to MI7
3Each DA of OMIE is denoted from S01 to S06

5

Table 1: The execution restrictions in European IDM

Restrictions

Accepted

SOB

Fully Partially Enter Delete

NON

FOK

IOC

AON

–

(cid:88)

–

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

–

(cid:88)

–

(cid:88)

–

–

(cid:88)

–

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

–

Here, it should be noted that SOs following link order
rule (which has a linked execution constraint [21, 31]) al-
ways contain FOK restriction. SOs are called an Iceberg
Order (IO) if they contain a large volume which is divided
into several smaller orders, called iceberg clips, that enter
the market sequentially only if the previous clip in the se-
quence was already fully accepted. The volume for every
clip is the same, meanwhile, the price can be the same with
the ﬁrst clip or incremental/decremental with respect to
the previous clip.

On the other hand, MOs entered with AON restriction
is called Block Orders (BOs). Meanwhile, MOs entered
with IOC are called Market Sweep Orders (MSOs). The
MSOs are particular orders as they can only be matched
with SOs already in SOB; they can not be matched with
any other MOs [31].

Finally, the main diﬀerence between the validity re-
strictions is that the market player can deﬁne the time
until the submitted bid remain in the SOB, which means
that the GTD restriction is imposed; or can choose to let
the submitted bid stay in the SOB as long as the time
validity of the order is entirely covered by the current or
future TSs, which means that the GFS restriction is im-
posed. Finally, the validity restrictions are set only for the
orders with NON or AON restriction as they are the only
ones that can remain in the SOB for future TSs.

2.3. Capacity allocation management

Today, the capacity allocation management in the Eu-
ropean DAM uses the hybrid model which contains both
Available Transfer Capacity (ATC) and Flow-Based mod-
els [25]. Meanwhile, the IDMs in Europe only rely on the
ATC model. Thus, the available capacity for the ﬁrst TS
of IDM in the Flow-Based coupling region is re-calculated
and adapted to the ATC model by the TSOs [32]. At
this moment, the X-BID project supports both explicit
(where decided by National Regulatory Authorities) and
implicit capacity allocation to allocate cross-border capac-
ity to users continuously. The number of interconnectors
using the explicit allocation has been reduced from three
to one (Germany-France) since 16th of June, 2018 [33].
The explicit allocation is a standalone capacity request by
users entities, while the implicit allocation is triggered by
trades generated in SOB. Thus, while the explicit alloca-

6

tion is an independent trade, similar to a bilateral transac-
tion, the implicit allocation is a consequence of the market
clearing algorithm. For this reason, the limits of the inter-
connectors used in implicit allocation already include the
eﬀect of the explicit allocation. Therefore, the paper only
simulates the implicit continuous allocation method.

3. Mathematical model

The structure of the integrated European IDM algo-
rithm contains two main building blocks. The basic one
(named TS Matching Model) consists in ﬁnding the mar-
ket solution for a given TS while the second one (named
Transition TS Model) models the transit from one TS to
the next. The second building block is described in Sec-
tion 4.2, while the basic one is detailed here. The pro-
posed TS Matching model presented in Fig. 1 contains
two main modules: (i) Optimization Module (OM) and
(ii) Data Processing Module (DPM). For each TS of ei-
ther CT or DA session, the OM maximizes the economic
surplus considering all bids (new submitted bids and bids
in the SOB) and satisfying all economic and network con-
straints. Meanwhile, the DPM is responsible for elaborat-
ing the SOB and the ATC of interconnectors for the next
TS.

Figure 1: Trading Matching model for one TS

3.1. Optimization Model

First of all, it should be noted that this model can be
used to run DA, CT, or the coordination of DA-CT. In
order to achieve this, the set of participant bidding areas
Ap and the set of considered periods in current TS, Tp are
properly set (hence, T h ⊆ Tp, T hh
hh ⊆ Tp);
before the optimization problem is solved.

h ⊆ Tp and T q

3.1.1. Objective function

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

M ax[

(ct,sur
a

− ct,pr
a

) −

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

ct,pen
l

]

(1)

a∈Ap

t∈Tp

t∈T q
hh

l∈Brp
l

Equation (1) comprises three terms: (i) the economic
; (ii) a penalty term

surplus of demand and supply, ct,sur
modeling the price-time priority rule, ct,pr
term related to the decomposition of power ﬂow into pos-
itive and negative power ﬂow to model the losses of DC
interconnectors, cpen
. It should be noted that the term (ii)
is not required for the DA, but only for CT.

and (iii) a penalty

a

a

l

Bids arriveNetwork ConstraintsOptimization ProblemMarket solutionEnergy ExchangesOMShare Order BookRe-calculate Available CapacityUpdate SOBDPMWaiting for next TSAs with any conventional market, the goal of this model

(1) is to maximize the Social Welfare (SW):

ct,sur
a

=

(cid:88)

s∈Sa

Qt

s · xt

s · P t

s +

(cid:88)

m∈Ma

Qm · xt

m · Pm (2)

−

Moreover, a penalty term ct,pr is deﬁned to model the

price-time priority rule:
(cid:88)

ct,pr
a = (

|Qt

s| · xt

s · T i

s +

s∈Sa

(cid:88)

m∈Ma

|Qm| · xt

m · T i

m) · ε (3)

a

s and T i

Notably, in CT sessions, a time priority rule is applied
for the bids that have the same submitted price: priority
is given to the earliest submitted bid. Mathematically, the
price-time priority rule considers only marginal bids that
have the same submitted price. Thus, the welfare created
by (2) is constant with respect to the incoming time of the
bids, while the penalty term (3) is forcing a loss of welfare
for the latest submitted bids. In this way, priority is given
to the execution of the bid which has the lowest value of in-
coming time (T i
m). Moreover, indirectly, this mech-
anism assures the unicity of the solution by distinguishing
between bids with equal submitted price. To guaranty the
maximization of SW, the parameter ε is added in (3) and
set to very small value (e.g 0.0001). So that, the value of
SW, i.e. ct,pr
is not perturbed signiﬁcantly.
The total SW is also penalized by the term ct,pen
. This
term, deﬁned by equation (4), has the main role to cor-
rectly decompose the power ﬂows in all interconnectors (f t
l
and f t
l,ms)
and negative (f t,−
l,ms) power ﬂows. This means
that when f t,+
l,ms are non-null, f t,−
/ f t,−
l,ms need to be
null and vice-versa. This decomposition is required to cor-
rectly model the real energy losses on such interconnectors
[34] and limit the upper and lower bounds of temporary
variable f t
l,ms. Therefore, cl for all interconnectors are set
to 0.001. This parameter is set such that the associated
penalty term does not have a negative impact on the mar-
ket solution, i.e. such that minimizing the power ﬂow of
interconnectors instead of maximizing the SW is avoided.
Moreover, this term has a secondary role:
it guaranties
an optimal distribution of the market areas net positions
into ﬂows on the meshed ATC interconnectors optimizing,
thus, the exploitation of their capacities. This penalty
term is given by:

l,ms ) into complementary positive (f t,+
and f t,−

l
/ f t,+

and f t,+

l

l

l

l

ct,pen
l

= cl · (f t,+

l − f t,−
l,ms and f t,−
l,ms are related to the MSOs
and are explained in detail latter in the next subsection.

In (4), variables f t,+

l,ms − f t,−

l + f t,+

l,ms)

(4)

3.1.2. Balancing equations
(cid:88)
s · xh

s )/4 + (

Qh

(cid:88)

Qhh
s

s∈Sa
m)/4 − P q

a = 0

Qm · xt

(
s∈Sa

(cid:88)

+ (

m∈Ma

∀h ∈ T h, hh ∈ T hh

h , q ∈ T q

hh, a ∈ Ap

· xhh

s )/2 + (

(cid:88)

s∈Sa

Qq

s · xq
s)

P t

a +

(cid:88)

f t
l +

(cid:88)

(f t,+
l

· (1 + lossl) + f t,−

l

)

l∈BrAC,p
f a.a
(cid:88)

f t
l −

l∈BrDC,p
f a.a
(cid:88)

(f t,+

l + f t,−

l

l∈BrAC,p
a.ta

l∈BrDC,p
a.ta

· (1 + lossl)) = 0

∀t ∈ T q
hh, a ∈ Ap
f t,+
l − Brt
Brt
l − f t,+
f t

l,max/4 ≤ 0
l ≤ 0
l = 0

l,min/4 − f t,−
l + f t,−

hh

∀l ∈ Brp
∀l ∈ Brp
∀l ∈ Brp

l , t ∈ T q
l , t ∈ T q
l , t ∈ T q

hh

hh

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Equality constraint (5) deﬁnes the net position of area
a, P t
a, in quarterly-hour q. Thus, the energy of hourly
orders is divided by 4 and half-hourly orders is divided
by 2. Consequently, it allows various production orders
in diﬀerent areas to match together, enhancing thus the
liquidity of the market. Meanwhile, equality constraint (6)
ensures that the net positions are balanced by the power
transits at each area. The loss coeﬃcient lossl, f t,+
and
f t,−
are added in (6) to take into account the losses in the
l
DC interconnectors and decompose the power ﬂow into
importing and exporting. Constraints (7)–(9) combined
with the penalty term (4) give f t,+

and f t,−

as in [34].

l

l

l

3.1.3. Order constraints

s) is in the range [Rs

Inequality constraints (10)–(13) model all market rules
for SOs. Inequality constraint (10)–(11) represent the exe-
cuted restrictions of SOs without IOs. The accepted ratio
of SOs (xt
min, 1]. Thus, for orders
subject to fully accepted or rejected restriction (FOK and
AON) Rmin is equal to 1, while is equal to 0 for partially
accepted restriction (NON and IOC). The constraint of
link orders is shown in (12) where link order is fully ac-
cepted or rejected according to the value of the binary
variable Ys. The relationship between the link orders is
qualiﬁed by the matrix IM lk
s :
s − xt

s ≤ 0

s · Rmin
Y t
∀s ∈ Sa \ IOa, t ∈ Tp, a ∈ Ap
xt
s − Y t
∀s ∈ Sa \ IOa, t ∈ Tp, a ∈ Ap
IM lk
xt
lk −

s · Y t

s ≤ 0

s ≤ 0

(cid:88)

s∈Sa

∀lk ∈ LKa, t ∈ Tp, a ∈ Ap

(10)

(11)

(12)

Inequality constraint (13), written for each iceberg clip
ic, ensures that ic ∈ io is executed sequentially. Here,
the ﬁrst clip is not considered because the ﬁrst element of
IM ic
is null
and updated in DPM:

io is null. The initial value of parameter Bic,t

io

io − Bic−1,t

xt
ic · IM ic
io
∀ic ∈ io, io ∈ IOa, t ∈ Tp, a ∈ Ap

≤ 0

(13)

It should be pointed out that the DA only contains
hourly SOs with IOC restriction, meanwhile the CT in-
cludes all types of orders and with diﬀerent product orders

(5)

7

such as hourly, half-hourly and quarterly-hour orders. The
constraints for diﬀerent product orders are modelled simi-
larly and distinguished by the sets T h ⊆ Tp, T hh
h ⊆ Tp and
T q
hh ⊆ Tp.

Constraints (14)–(23) model the market rules of MOs
that include BOs (14)–(15) and MSOs (14)–(23). The BOs
are always subject to AON restriction, thus Rmin
m equals
to 1 and Ym is a free variable. When (14)–(15) model the
BOs, the accepted ratio xt
m −
U t,e

m is in the range [Ym, Ym ·(U t,s

m )].

The MSOs are subjected to IOC restriction, thus Rmin
of MSOs equals to 0 and the binary variable (Ym) in (14)–(15)
is ﬁxed to 1. When (14)–(15) model the MSOs, the ac-
cepted ratio xt

m in the range [0, (U t,s

m − U t,e

m )].

m

m − U t,e

Likewise SOs in (10)–(11), constraints (14)–(15) also
model the execution restriction of MOs. Since MOs are
deﬁned for several consecutive periods, the term of unit
step (U t,s
m ) ([21, 34]) is added in (14)–(15) to set
up the upper bound of the accepted ratio xt
If it is
inside the submitted periods (from T s
m of one
BO is forced to be equal to 1 or 0 for the entire period,
meanwhile, xt
m of one MSOs is in the range [0,1]; otherwise
xt
m is equal to 0:

m.
m): xt

m to T e

m − U t,e

m ) ≤ 0

m · (U t,s

m − xt

Ym · Rmin
∀m ∈ Ma, t ∈ T h, a ∈ Ap
xt
m − Ym · (U t,s
∀m ∈ Ma, t ∈ T h, a ∈ Ap

m − U t,e

m ) ≤ 0

(14)

(15)

The previous constraints (5)–(15) alone do not guar-
antee the satisfaction of the clearing rule of the MSO
orders, i.e. MSOs can only be matched with SOs. For
this, it is necessary for the total accepted volume of the
MSOs supply or demand, respectively, to only be cleared
by a fraction of the total accepted volume of the SOs de-
mand or supply, respectively, while satisfying market con-
straints. Conceptually, this means that the MSOs need
to be also cleared separately from the other MOs in an
“independent” market session where only SOs and MSOs
are present. However, this “independent” market needs to
be properly linked to the actual market session constraints
(5)–(13) in order to achieve correct market results.

s

, f t

,Y t,ms
s

and Y ms

From a mathematical standpoint, this is achived by in-
l,ms, f t,+
troducing the intermediate variables, P q,ms
l,ms,
a
f t,−
l,ms, xt,ms
m , to represent the “indepen-
dent” MSO market session and link it to the main one.
Then constraints (16)–(20) are introduced to model this
“independent” session; here, (17) and (20) repeat the bal-
ancing equations (6), (9) and market rules of SOs (10)–(13),
respectively, but all original variables are replaced by the
intermediate ones. The intermediate net position P q,ms
is deﬁned in (16) as a function of only MSOs (the xt
m
variables) and the fraction of SOs they match (the xt,ms
).
This fraction needs to be lower, at maximum equal, to
the actual cleared volume of the SOs (the xt
s variables)
which is achieved by the inequality constraint (21). Then,

a

s

8

since the MSOs and SOs are also present in the main con-
straints (5)–(13) where they determine the actual power
l , f t,+
ﬂows on interconnectors (f t
), and here they
also need to be cleared over all the areas, then, the interme-
l,ms, f t,+
diate power ﬂows created here by the MSOs (f t
l,ms
and f t,−
l,ms) are limited by the actual power ﬂows in the
inequality constraints (18) and (19):

and f t,−

l

l

(cid:88)

(
s∈Sa

Qh

s · xh,ms
s

)/4 + (

(cid:88)

+

s∈Sa

Qq

s · xq,ms
s

+ (

(cid:88)

s∈Sa
(cid:88)

Qhh
s

· xhh,ms
s

)/2

Qm · xt

m)/4 − P q,ms

a

m∈M Sa

h , q ∈ T q

hh, a ∈ Ap

∀h ∈ T h, hh ∈ T hh
(6), (9)
l,ms − f t,+
f t,+
l − f t,−
f t,−
(10)–(13)
s − xt
xt,ms

l ≤ 0
l,ms ≤ 0

s ≤ 0

∀l ∈ Brp
∀l ∈ Brp

l , t ∈ T q
l , t ∈ T q

hh

hh

∀s ∈ Sa, t ∈ T h, a ∈ Ap

= 0

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

Inequality constraints (22)–(23) impose that the total
accepted volume of MSO demand is not higher than the to-
tal accepted volume of SO supply with which it is matched
and in reverse for MSO supply and SO demand. Thus,
these constraints ensure that MSOs can not be matched
with themselves:
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

Qm · xt

m)/4 + (

Qh

s · xh,ms
s

)/4

(
m∈M Sd
a
(cid:88)

+ (

s∈Ss
a

(cid:88)

(
m∈M Ss
a
(cid:88)

+ (

s∈Sd
a

s∈Ss
a

Qhh
s

· xhh,ms
s

)/2 + (

(cid:88)

s∈Ss
a

Qq

s · xq,ms
s

)/4 ≤ 0

∀h ∈ T h, hh ∈ T hh

h , q ∈ T q
hh, a ∈ Ap
(cid:88)
Qh
m)/4 + (

s · xh,ms
s

)/4

Qm · xt

s∈Sd
a

Qhh
s

· xhh,ms
s

)/2 + (

(cid:88)

s∈Sd
a

Qq

s · xq,ms
s

)/4 ≥ 0

∀h ∈ T h, hh ∈ T hh

h , q ∈ T q

hh, a ∈ Ap

(22)

(23)

3.1.4. Network constraints

This model only considers the current IDM in Europe,
and thus it only contains the ATC inequality constraints
(24)–(27), and ramping up and down of exchange energy
on single interconnector or group of interconnectors be-
tween two consecutive periods (28)–(31).

Inequality constraints (24)–(25) limit the energy ﬂow
through the interconnectors by two parameters Brh,max
in each quarterly-hour period. Since Brh,max
and Brh,min
l
and Brh,min
are in MWh, as provided by the TSO, they
are divided by 4 to provide the boundary of quarterly-hour
energy ﬂow:

l

l

l

l − Brh,max
f t
l
Brh,min
/4 − f t
l

/4 ≤ 0

l ≤ 0

∀l ∈ Brp
∀l ∈ Brp

l , t ∈ T q
l , t ∈ T q

hh

hh

(24)

(25)

Meanwhile, inequality constraints (26)–(27) limit the
l,ms us-
) power

upper and lower bound of temporary power ﬂow f t
ing the actual positive (f t,+
ﬂow:

) and negative (f t,−

l

l

l,ms − f t,+
f t
f t,−
l − f t

l ≤ 0
l,ms ≤ 0

∀l ∈ Brp
∀l ∈ Brp

l , t ∈ T q
l , t ∈ T q

hh

hh

(26)

(27)

Inequality constraints (28)–(31) model the ramping con-
straints and they limit the variation of exchanged energy
between two consecutive periods on individual intercon-
nectors (28)–(29) or group of interconnectors (30)–(31) to
reduce risks that might threaten the security of supply due
to frequent large changes in the production. If the inter-
connector is not subject to ramping limit, RU and RD
have large values. Here, the total exchanged energy on
interconnector is computed for each hour. For the current
TS, the energy exchanged in the previous TS is also con-
sidered by the parameter f t−1,int
in order to compute the
actual energy exchanges in the considered TS:

l

3.2.2. Available transfer capacity

l

l

and Bh,min
l
and Bh,min
l

In the real life, TSOs are responsible for this activity
with a complex procedure to provide Bh,max
in
real time. In this paper, parameter Bh,max
are
updated to Bh,max
l,new and Bh,min
l,new for the next TS according
to (32) and (33). This is made to emulate the real time
behavior of the ATC limits according to the requirements
of CTMA [8]. Thus, according to (32) and (33), they are
if f t
updated with respect to the sign of f t
is positive,
l :
l
Bh,max
l,new is increased; if f t
l is negative,
Bh,max
l,new is decreased:

l,new is reduced and Bh,min
l,new is increased and Bh,min

Bh,max

l,new = Bh,max

l

∀l ∈ Bp
Bh,min

l , h ∈ T h
l,new = Bh,min

l

− 4 · max
t∈T q
hh

(f t

l , 0) − 4 · min
t∈T q
hh

(f t

l , 0)

(32)

− 4 · max
t∈T q
hh

(f t

l , 0) − 4 · min
t∈T q
hh

(f t

l , 0)

∀l ∈ Bp

l , h ∈ T h

(33)

(f t−1

l + f t−1,int

l

)

4. Hybrid intra-day market mechanism

(28)

4.1. State-of-the-art

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

) −

t∈T hh

h

t∈T q
hh

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(f t

l + f t,int

l

h

t∈T hh
− Rt,U
(cid:88)

t∈T q
hh
l ≤ 0∀l ∈ Brp
(f t−1

l , t ∈ T h
l + f t−1,int

(cid:88)

l

) −

h

t∈T q
t∈T hh
hh
+ Rt,D
l ≤ 0∀l ∈ Brp
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

l , t ∈ T h
) −

l + f t,int

l

(f t

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

t∈T hh

h

t∈T q
hh

(f t

l + f t,int

l

)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(f t−1
l

h

l∈ls

t∈T hh
+ f t−1,int
l
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

l∈ls

t∈T q
hh
) − Rt,U
(cid:88)

t∈T hh
ls ≤ 0∀ls ∈ LS, t ∈ T h
(cid:88)
l + f t−1,int
(f t−1

) −

h

l

t∈T q
hh

h

l∈ls

t∈T hh
+ f t,int
l

t∈T q
hh
) + Rt,D

ls ≤ 0∀ls ∈ LS, t ∈ T h

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(f t
l

l∈ls

t∈T hh

h

t∈T q
hh

(29)

(30)

(31)

3.2. Data processing module (DPM)

According to Fig. 1, the DPM is launched after the
solution of the OM has been found. Therefore, at this
step, the accepted ratio (xt
m) and the exchanged
energy (f t
l ) in the current TS are known. Now, this module
will prepare the data for the next TS, acting on:

s and xt

3.2.1. Shared order book

The SOB collects all the bids that were not fully exe-
cuted (xt (cid:54)= 1) and are subjected to NON or AON restric-
tion. Thus, in the case of partial execution (0 < xt < 1),
the order will be allocated in SOB with the un-executed
volume (Qt · (1 − xt)) and the initial submitted price (P t).
Moreover, the validity restrictions (GFS and GTD) are
checked for the parameters T r
m and the validated
orders are deleted:
if the current time is later than the
T r
s and T r
m, the bid is deleted from the SOB. Finally, the
parameter Bic
io of the iceberg order is updated as well. If
ic is fully accepted in period t, Bic,t
io

s and T r

equals 1.

Until this year, the PXs set to trade with CT (Nord-
pool Spot, EPEX Spot, APX, Belpex) were coupled to-
gether with diﬀerent GCT to form the integrated Euro-
pean IDM [26]. However, currently a major challenge is
how to coordinate the CT running PXs with the incom-
ing PXs running DA, such as GME and OMIE. To answer
this question, two oﬃcial proposals, introduced by GME
[9] and OMIE [10], where GCT is 60 minutes have been
made: (i) Option A just allows a small degree of co-
ordination preserving the historical design and, thus, it
represents a fast way of integration, while (ii) Option B
is representative for the new structure with a large degree
of coordination. At the present moment, only the IDM of
OMIE is coupled through Option A as of June 12th of
2018, but the market design will be changed to Option B
in future [11]. In general, due to their very recent or near
future integration, the impact of Option A and Option
B is not yet known. In details:

(cid:136) Option A in Fig. 2: GME has six DAs (see Fig. 2a)
and two of them (MI2 and MI4) are opened to all Eu-
ropean PXs using, the so-called Complementary Re-
gional Auction (CRA). OMIE also has six DAs (see
Fig. 2b) but there is no CRA. The DA-CT coordina-
tion starts from MI2 in Italy and S01 in OMIE and
operates as follows: once a DA session is closed a CT
session is opened for only periods that are not auc-
tioned anymore. By allowing the DA-CT coordina-
tion only to these hours, the level of uncertainties in
the capacity calculation is reduced, therefore there is
a higher probability of ﬁnding additional cross-zonal
capacities.

9

the same day. It thus enhances the eﬃciency in using
the capacity of interconnectors. As with Option A,
the GCT is 60 minutes.

As it can be noticed, in both options OMIE does not
open its DAs to the other PXs (it does not have CRAs).
This is because, with the Minimum Income Condition adopted
in OMIE [29] and the block orders used in CWE, ﬁnding
the market solution would require too much time , as they
introduce non-convex issues and the procedure of clearing
the market would be the same with the European DAM
[21] taking, thus, even tens of minutes to solve. In fact,
the time threshold of executing either DA or CRA is 10
minutes [7], so CRAs are not an option for OMIE.

For both GME and OMIE, the bids in DAs are deleted
after solving each DA, then players can modify their pro-
duction by submitting new bids in the CT session.

4.2. Transition TS model

In order to evaluate the impact of the DA-CT coordi-
nation, the paper proposes an iterative process in Fig. 4
which simulates the operation of such a market, in which
the OM and DPM interact in time; from one TS to the
next.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: The Option A: (a) GME and (b) OMIE

In Fig. 2, DAM, CRA and DA delivery stand for
the dispatching periods cleared by the DAM and the
DA of IDM (MI1-MI6) and (S01-S06) in GME and
OMIE, respectively. The CT are periods when GME
and OMIE operate in continuous trading mechanism
with a GCT of 60 minutes.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: The Option B: (a) GME and (b) OMIE

(cid:136) Option B in Fig 3: GME has three DAs (see Fig.
3a), and two are CRAs (MI2 and MI3). OMIE still
has six DAs, and no CRA (see Fig. 3b). Here, the
DA-CT coordination operates as in Option A for
GME starting with MI2. Meanwhile, the coordina-
tion in OMIE is wider, in the sense that in any CT
session trades can be made for any future period of

10

Figure 4: Proposed iterative process

The proposed process contains ﬁve main steps:

1. Input data:

Initializes the set of TS (ts ∈ T S)
sequences, in which set Ap and Tp are created in
correspondence to ts. The model starts with the
ﬁrst element of ts ∈ T S and moves to DPM;

2. DPM: With ts = 1, the SOB receives the initial
data corresponding to the ﬁrst TS. If the ts ≥ 2, the
SOB receives the bids corresponding to the current
ts and all the bids that are subject to NON or AON
restrictions and were not fully executed in the pre-
vious ts (already located in SOB). Moreover, ATC
limits are updated;

3. OM: OM receives the data which arrives from DPM
and solves the problem deﬁned in Section 3.1 for the
current TS. Then, it sends the market results back
to DPM;

Previous day (D-1)...  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24Operation day (D)1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24MI1MI2MI3MI4MI5MI6DAMMI1MI2MI3MI4MI5MI6Closing DAMDA DeliveryDAM DeliveryCTCRA DeliveryPrevious day (D-1)... 12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24Operation day (D)1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24ClosingSO1SO2SO3SO4SO5SO6SO1SO2SO3SO4SO5SO6DAMDAMDA DeliveryDAM DeliveryCTOperation day (D)1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23 24Closing MI1MI2MI3DAMMI3Previous day (D-1)...12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24MI1MI2DAMDA DeliveryDAM DeliveryCTCRA DeliveryPrevious day (D-1)...12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24Operation day (D)1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24ClosingSO1SO2SO3SO4SO5SO6SO1SO2SO3SO4SO5SO6DAMDAMDA DeliveryDAM DeliveryCTYESUpdate SOB and ATCMarket solutionExchanged Energy Filter Bids can enter SOB and Re-calculate ATCTS   ø  ENDNOInput data Optimization Problem DPMOMNext ts4. DPM: As explained in Section 3.2, the un-executed
volume of bids that subscribe to NON or AON re-
striction are computed using the accepted ratio x,
while if T r
m are smaller than ts, the bids are
deactivated immediately. Meanwhile, the ATC lim-
its are re-calculated using (32)–(33);

s and T r

5. Next ts ∈ T S is activated and second, third and
forth steps (DPM and OM) are repeated until the
last TS is solved.

m (when T i

In the above process, CT oﬀers are inserted for the
corresponding ts (to which they belong) together with the
valid bids from SOB. Then, the bids are activated by T i
s
and T i
m are equal ts) and deactivated by
T r
s and T r
m are smaller than ts). Addition-
ally, ts can be DA and/or CT, thus the operation of DA
and/or CT is decided by the set of a ∈ Ap corresponding
to ts ∈ T S.

m (when T r

s or T i

s or T r

5. Test and Results

5.1. Case Study

The case study implements the current conﬁguration of
the Integrated European IDM which contains the follow-
ing PXs: Nordpool Spot (Scandinavian and Baltic coun-
tries), EPEX Spot (France, Germany, Switzerland), APX
(United Kingdom and Netherlands), Belpex (Belgium),
GME (Italy), and OMIE (Iberian countries). The GME
is preparing to enter, OMIE is already participating as
of June 2018, while the other PXs are integrated for few
years. The market topology is shown in Fig. 5 and in-
cludes 52 bidding areas and 71 interconnectors. Here, the
dark areas belong to GME, the areas with diagonal lines to
OMIE while the no-color areas are the CT areas. Germany
(DE) uses both market designs. Additionally, the con-
tinuous lines show AC interconnectors, while the dashed
lines indicate DC interconnectors. The parameters for the
network constraints are obtained from the real data of a
working day that is Wednesday, 9th of March 2016: the
initial ATC limits are obtained from [28] for GME, [29]
for OMIE, [35] for EPEX Spot, APX, Belpex and [36] for
Nordpool Spot; the interconnectors between CT and DA
are obtained from [37]. According to [38], the line-set con-
ditions are applied in bidding area NO1A (NO5-NO1A and
NO2-NO1A) and DK1A (NO2-DK1A and SE3-DK1A) of
Nord Pool Spot.

The orders of GME and OMIE are publicly available
and they were obtained directly from the oﬃcial websites
[28] and [29], respectively. Meanwhile, the orders in Cen-
tral West of Europe and Northern Europe are not publicly
available but only global information is: hourly electricity
price, total accepted volume and low resolution graphical
ﬁles of cumulated curves. Thus, the authors had to cre-
ate artiﬁcially realistic orders using the total hourly (and
quarterly) exchanged volume, and maximum, minimum
and average prices in [30] for EPEX Spot, APX, Belpex

Figure 5: Case study European Intra-day market topology

and [39] for Nord Pool Spot. Here, the total exchange vol-
ume for every period t in each area a is split into bids with
the same submitted volume; here the number of bids are
user-deﬁned such to obtain a realistic number of bids for
each type of order. Then, for each of these, the price is
chosen randomly in the range [min price, max price]. In
particular, for the accepted bids, the price for the demand
bids is chosen in the upper half of the range [average price,
max price] while the supply bids price in the lower half of
the range [min price, average price]. In this way, the ac-
cepted volume in the ﬁnal result of the proposed model
will be exactly the same as the real market while the price
of accepted bids will be in the real price range.

The resulting number of orders is listed in Table 2. In
particular, the data in OMIE considers only the orders of
unit producers satisfying the Minimum Income Condition.
Moreover, the number of DAs in GME is only ﬁve instead
of seven because the paper is using the data before GME
adopted seven auctions, and was operated with ﬁve DAs.

Table 2: The number of orders in the case study

Type

Restrictions

Number

SO

MO

NON
FOK, IOC, AON

116038
18364

AON (BOs)
IOC (MSOs)

161
159

In real life, the CT starts from 14:00 pm of the previous
day (D-1) to the last GCT at 10:30 pm of the current
day (D) [12] and the GCT for cross-border is 60 minutes
between either GME or OMIE and EPEX Spot, while the
GCT for local trade is 30 minutes [26]. Therefore, TS

11

PRGPSICIMALTROSNSUDCSUDCNORSARDCORSCOACBRNNGRECFOGNNORDMFTVBSPDEFRESMOPTGB1GB2BENLDK2DK1SE4NO2NO1NO5NO3SE3NO4SE2SE1FIEELVLTSVIZFRANAUSTDK1ANO1AFREERILRILRELBELBICHsequences for every 10 minutes were created for a total of
195 TS to simulate the whole length of IDM in one day.

Other characteristics of the optimization problem are:
the set a ∈ Ap contains 19 bidding areas (the dark areas in
Fig 5) for GME or 3 bidding areas (the areas with diagonal
lines in Fig 5) for OMIE when simulating only DA for
GME or OMIE; 30 bidding areas (no-color areas in Fig 5)
when simulating the CT areas and all the 52 bidding areas
when simulating the DA-CT coordination.

The model was tested in three diﬀerent market operat-
ing conditions. In order to validate the numerical perfor-
mances of the algorithm when executed for real-size prob-
lem and investigate the impact to the hybrid IDM mecha-
nism for Option A and B:

(cid:136) Benchmark: The current state-of-the-art at the be-
ginning of 2018 of the European IDM, in which there
is no coupling between DA and CT areas. This op-
tion was achieved by setting the capacity of intercon-
nectors between DA and CT areas to zero obtaining,
thus, independent DA and CT market areas. The
results of this case study are used to evaluate the re-
liability of the data and the numerical performance
of the proposed model;

(cid:136) Option A: Currently, partially implement as OMIE
is integrated as of June but GME is not. Here, the
coordination of DA-CT is opened for periods follow-
ing the closure of DA or CRA, all the bids not cleared
in the current DA are removed from SOB before
starting a new DA but they are allowed to partic-
ipate in the CTs between the two DAs. This can
be achieved through the parameter T r
s (only single
period orders in DAs). The parameter T r
s of bids
covering the periods of the next DA auction is set to
1 (which is always smaller than the value of the cur-
rent ts), while the T r
s of bids covering the periods
not to be auctioned is set as the bids in CT, thus
allowing these bids to match with bids which come
during the DA-CT coordinated period;

(cid:136) Option B: A possible future scenario for the Euro-
pean IDM. Here, there are only three DAs in GME:
MI1, MI2 and MI3 (see Fig. 3a). Thus, in order
to use the same data to simulate Option B the fol-
lowing procedure was applied: ﬁrst, comparing the
timescales of Fig. 2a with Fig. 3a it is clear that the
MI3 and MI5 of Option A are missing from Option
B while MI1, MI2 and MI4 of Option A are equiv-
alent to MI1, MI2 and MI3 of Option B; thus, all
the bids in MI3 and MI5 are converted to bids in the
s) and removing time (T r
CT with incoming time (T i
s )
deﬁned with respect to the GCT, 240 minutes and 60
minutes before the dispatching period, respectively.
This assumption is acceptable since the distance be-
tween two auctions is large and the players in GME
have a chance to adjust the schedule dispatch by the
CT mechanism. Meanwhile, the bids of MI1, MI2,

and MI4 of Option A are now the bids of MI1, MI2,
and MI3 of Option B. Because the trading of the
CT in OMIE is for the whole day, the parameter T r
s
of all bids covering the periods to be auctioned in
the next DA has the same value with the parameter
T i
s of all bids in the next DA. Meanwhile, the bids
in OMIE of the periods not to be auctioned anymore
behave as in Option A.

Moreover, it should be also noted that all the mar-
ket operating conditions use the same set of bids making,
thus, the analysis insensitive to bidding behaviour change
and allowing the impact of the various market operating
conditions be precisely evaluated. The analysis of the bid-
ding behaviour is, in this case, constrained by the absence
of information about the generating plants represented in
the bids and the companies that controls them. Thus the
absence of the cost structure of the power plants makes
any assumption in the evolution of the bids arbitrary, so
conclusion may be unrealistic.

All scenarios have been solved with a desktop PC equipped

with an Intel(R) E5-1620 v3 @ 3.5GHz processor and 32
Gb RAM. The OM is modeled and solved in GAMS 24.0.2
modeling environment [40], using the CPLEX solver. In
order to guarantee that the best possible feasible solution
is found by CPLEX, the optimality gaps where set to zero.
The DPM is implemented in MATLAB 2015b [41]. The
database of all cases study is created in Excel Oﬃce [42].

5.2. Results

5.2.1. The Benchmark
Numerical performance of the algorithm. The numerical
performance of the proposed model is here evaluated for
the Benchmark. However, similarly results were reported
for the other operating conditions. Fig 6 shows the char-
acteristics of the Optimization Problem in the OM for all
the sessions in terms of total number of variables, of binary
variables and constraints. There are 207 iterations made
of: 195 TSs, 6 DAs of OMIE, 5 DAs of GME, and 1 DA
of Germany. It can be seen that the size of the optimiza-
tion problem is very large since the maximum number of
constraints is 74472, of variables is 61035, and of binary
variables is 3918.

Figure 6: The report of number of: (i) variables, (ii) binary variables,
and (iii) constraints for the Benchmark

12

160120180207Trading Sessions and Discreate Auctions0246Number104EquationsBinary VariablesVariablesMoreover, a progressive reduction of the number of
variables and, thus, of constraints, with the advance of
the market sessions is noticed in Fig. 6: the cause of this
is the progressive reduction of the time validity of the mar-
ket sessions (see second paragraph of subsection 2.1) with
the advance of time, e.g. for the market session at period
1 bids can be submitted for period 1 till the end of the day
while for the market session at period 17 bids can be sub-
mitted from period 17 till the end of the day. Additionally,
the next day IDM (D+1), for which the bids can be sub-
mitted from 14:00 of the current IDM, is not considered
in this simulation.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: The report of executed time for all sessions of the Bench-
mark

Figure 8: Maximum prices of IDM in EPEX Spot: (a) the real case
and (b) the simulated case

The computation time of the proposed model is shown
in Fig. 7 for the Benchmark. It is clear that the per-
formance of the proposed model is very good since the
executed time of one iteration took: maximum 0.656 s,
minimum 0.046 s, and in average 0.14 s. These values are
well suitable to the requirement of the integrated European
IDM where the solution has to be provided immediately
for CT and in less than 10 minutes for DA [7].

Analysis of the solution. First of all, the market solutions
in DA (GME, OMIE), and CT are compared to the real
results in order to validate the data. The comparisons for
GME and OMIE revealed that the total accepted volume
and marginal price are exactly the public results in [28]
and [29] (error = 0% for all periods).

Table 3: The deviation of the simulated with respect to the real
prices in percentage in EPEX Spot

Criteria (%)

France Germany

Switzerland

Max [period]

36 [17 h]

22.38 [5 h]

13.2 [13 h]

Min [period]

1.27 [3 h]

0.37 [13 h]

0.23 [4 h]

Average

10.51

5.18

4.54

For the CT, the EPEX Spot market is analyzed in de-
tail since the same procedure was used to generate the
data for all CT markets; the conclusion formulated here
also hold for the remaining areas. Here, the maximum
price (max price) of accepted orders in EPEX Spot is pre-
sented in Fig. 8 and the deviation in percentage of the

simulated and the real result is shown in Table 3 to con-
ﬁrm the reliability of the data generation procedure. In
the real case (see Fig. 8a), the lowest of max price is be-
tween 2 am and 5 am, then it starts increasing; the highest
of max price is between 19 pm and 21 pm. This behaviour
of the max price is repeated in the simulated case (see Fig.
8b) Moreover, the average deviation is not high: about 5%
for Germany and Switzerland, and about 10% for France.
These errors occur because in real life, the price of one
period in CT changes when a new bid arrives and, thus,
since this information is not available it is very diﬃcult to
obtain a result very close to the real one with randomly
generated data and coming, removing time. Additionally,
the maximum deviation of the price (see Table 3) does not
happen at the same period in the three countries of EPEX
Spot. Therefore, it can be said that the generated data for
CT is acceptable.

In order to test the ability of the proposed model to
match diﬀerent product orders (quarterly, half-hourly and
hourly orders) and with diﬀerent incoming times, the hourly
orders in GME and OMIE are decomposed into hourly,
half-hourly and quarterly orders. The results revealed that
the product orders can match each other since the calcu-
lated accepted volume and marginal price are the same
with the normal condition (all hourly orders).

Finally, the total accepted volume of supply and de-
mand in the entire Europe are shown in Table 4. Here,
the second column indicates the amount of volume of SOs
that were matched with MSOs (Column 3). The second
and third columns of Table 4 show that the market rule
of MSOs, in which MSOs can only match with SOs, is ful-

13

060120180207Trading Sessions and Discrete Auctions00.20.40.60.8Time [s]Executed timeAverage executed time159131721242030405060FranceGermanySwitzerland15913172124Periods2030405060FranceGermanySwitzerlandTable 4: The trading volume of the Benchmark in MWh

SOms MSO

DA

CT

Supply

159.9

783.37

198226.91

172210.41

Demand

782.3

159.9

198226.91

171304.44

ﬁlled. There is a small diﬀerence (1.07 MWh) between the
accepted volume of SOs that matched with MSOs from
demand side (the second row of column one) and MSOs
from supply side (the ﬁrst row of column two) because
there are some SOs from demand side in 22th and 23th
periods which are supplied by MSOs through DC inter-
connectors with non-null losses. The fourth column shows
the accepted volume in DA (GME and OMIE), in which
the total accepted volume of supply and demand are equal
because the interconnectors in GME and OMIE are loss-
less. Finally, the last column shows the accepted volume
in CT; here the total accepted volume of supply is higher
than demand because of the losses on the DC intercon-
nectors, e.g. NorNed (NO2-NL), Baltic Cable (DE-SE4),
BritNed (GB2-NL), IFA (GB1-FR).

To sum up, the model and the data are reliable for fur-
ther analysis since all the constraints worked correctly and,
considering the missing real data issue, the small average
errors between real and calculated results are contained.

5.2.2. Global analysis: economical metrics

Next, the operation of the European IDM in the three
operating conditions is simulated using the proposed model.
First of all, the TV4 and SW are shown in Table 5.
It
should ﬁrst be reminded that in the Benchmark there
is no connection between the DA and CT areas as OMIE
and GME are not integrated. Option A and Option B
represent future possible situations and are simulated by
considering the current ATC of interconnectors between
the DA and CT areas (the congestion scenario) and by
considering a very high value for the ATC of the same
interconnectors (the non-congestion scenario). The in-
terconnectors inside the DA and CT areas are kept to the
real values in both scenarios.

Table 5: The global criteria for three cases study

Scenario

Operating

condition

SW Trading Volume [GWh]
[Me]

Total

DA

CT

From Table 5, it results that, in general, the total SW
and TV of the non-congestion scenarios are higher than
that of either the Benchmark or congestion scenarios.
It means that the impact of current ATC limits is sig-
niﬁcant in the integrated European IDM. From the last
column of Table 5, it results that the liquidity of the Eu-
ropean IDM increases since the TV of all cases are higher
than the TV of the Benchmark. However, in the third
column of Table 5, a reduction of SW for Option B -
congestion (- 0.49 Me) with respect to the Benchmark
even if the TV increases (5.28 GWh) can be noticed. It is
due to the diﬀerence in market design between CT, where
the market is executed whenever a new bid arrives, and
DA, where the market is solved at a ﬁxed point in time:
with the same submitted bids but diﬀerent coming time
(T i
s/m), the SW of CT can be smaller than that of DA (as
explained in the simple example of Appendix A).

Therefore, the focus is put on investigating in details
the total TV of DA (in the fourth column) and CT (in the
ﬁfth column):
(cid:136) DA:

In Option A, because of the two CRAs in
GME, the TV of DA increased in comparison to
the Benchmark with 1.71 GWh for the conges-
tion scenario and with 11.43 GWh for the non-
congestion scenario. Meanwhile, in the Option B,
the TV of DA in both cases decreased in comparison
to the Benchmark because of the lack of two DAs
(MI3 and MI5 in Option A) in GME, e.g. - 45.12
GWh for the congestion scenario and - 35.74 GWh
for the non-congestion scenario;

(cid:136) CT: In general, because of the participation of GME
and OMIE in the CT, the TV in CT increased in
all cases with respect to the Benchmark. The TV
in CT of Option B is always higher than that of
Option A because Option B has a larger degree of
DA-CT coordination.

Table 6: The revenue of supply and the expenditure of demand for
PXs of the Benchmark in Me

PXs

Supply Demand

GME

4.784

OMIE

1.989

REST

3.409

4.795

1.99

4.637

Benchmark

20.52

426.09

313.88

739.97

Congestion

Option A

20.57

427.80

321.97

749.76

Option B

20.03

380.97

364.28

745.25

Non-congestion

Option A

21.07

437.52

357.85

795.36

Option B

20.80

390.35

439.87

830.22

4TV is computed by the sum of the supply accepted volume and

the demand accepted volume.

Table 6 presents the revenue of supply and the expendi-
ture of demand for the Benchmark of GME, OMIE, and
the REST of PXs (Nordpool Spot, APX, EPEX Spot and
Belbex) in the last row. They were calculating according
to the payment schemes of the market mechanism: pay-
as-bid for CT and marginal zonal price for DA. Moreover,
Fig. 9a and Fig. 9b show the deviation of the revenue
of supply and the expenditure of demand of the conges-
tion and non-congestion scenarios with respect to the

14

(a)

(a)

(b)
Figure 9: The deviation of the congestion and non-congestion
scenarios respect to the Benchmark for: (9a) Supply revenue, and
(9b) Demand expenditure

(b)
Figure 10: The import and export energy of GME and OMIE in one
day: (10a) Congestion and (10b) Non-Congestion

Benchmark, respectively. In Fig. 9a and Fig. 9b, the
supply revenue and the demand expenditure of OMIE and
the REST of PXs increase in comparison to the Bench-
mark. Therefore, the integrated European IDM brings a
positive signal to both supply and demand in OMIE and
the REST of PXs. Meanwhile, the revenue of supply de-
creases in Fig. 9a and the expenditure of demand increases
in Fig. 9b for GME. It means that the TV of the supply
of GME decreases and the TV of the demand of GME in-
creases in the integrated European IDM. This is due to
the two CRAs in GME, in which the demand has a trend
to buy energy from outside of GME where the supply bids
are cheaper, thus the suppliers in GME become uncom-
petitive. By observation of Fig. 9, it results that Option
B has a stronger impact on the market result than Op-
tion A because the apexes of Option B are always higher
than those of Option A for the positive values and vice-
versa for the negative values (the supply of GME in Fig.
9a) in both congestion and non-congestion scenarios when
compared independently.

5.2.3. Global analysis: impact of ATC limits

Fig. 10 shows the imported and exported energy of
GME and OMIE for the congestion and non-congestion
scenarios. Here, the negative values stand for import-
ing energy and the positive values for exporting energy.
The continuous line is representative for GME, while the
dashed line for OMIE. Fig. 10 conﬁrms that the current
ATC of the interconnectors of both OMIE-EPEX Spot and
GME-EPEX Spot are limiting the transfer energy in the
integrated IDM structure: it varies between -4317 MWh to
4447 MWh for the non-congestion scenario and between

-1701 MWh to 125 MWh for the congestion scenario.
Fig. 10 also shows that GME tends to buy energy from
other countries, since the lines are always below zero for
all periods in both scenarios. Meanwhile, OMIE can ei-
ther import or export energy but the current ATC limits
reduce the chance for players in OMIE to export energy:
the amount of exported energy are signiﬁcantly reduced in
the congestion scenario (see Fig. 10a) with respect to the
non-congestion scenario (see Fig. 10b), e.g. in Option
A 339.2 MWh are exported in the congestion scenario
and 9366.76 MWh in the non-congestion scenario; in
Option B 0 MWh is exported in the congestion scenario
and 20314.8 MWh in the non-congestion scenario.

To better understand the restrictions of the actual ATC
limits, Fig. 11 represents the ones initially available to the
IDM market. It is reminded that the ATC limits of the
IDM strongly depend on the margins remaining after the
execution of the DAM and, thus, they can have very strin-
gent values. Fig. 11a shows that, with the exception of
the ﬁrst four periods, OMIE cannot export energy, which
conﬁrms the results of Fig. 10. Fig. 11b shows only the
ATC limits in importing around GME area since GME
tends to import and the export limits are very high.
It
can be noticed that among the three intra-border inter-
connectors (FRAN-FR, SVIZ-CH, and AUST-DE), except
period 20, only the SVIZ-CH one has available margin.
However, the ﬂow on this interconnector is determined by
the ﬂows on CH-FR and CH-DE, among which only CH-
FR has available capacity. It results that GME can only
import through the radial path SVIZ-CH and CH-FR, so
the actual available capacity is given by the most limiting
between the two.

15

A_ConB_ConA_UnconB_UnconOptions-40-2002040GMEOMIERESTA_ConB_ConA_UnconB_UnconOptions0204060GMEOMIEREST15913172124Periods-1800-1500-1200-900-600-3000300Imp/Exp Energy [MWh]GME-Option AGME-Option BOMIE-Option AOMIE-Option B15913172124Periods-5000-3000-10000100030005000Imp/Exp Energy [MWh]GME-Option AGME-Option BOMIE-Option AOMIE-Option B(a)

(b)
Figure 11: Available capacity before of the IDM: (11a) OMIE border
and (11b) GME border

Table 7: The SW congestion and the congestion cost of both Op-
tions in Me

Options

PXs

SW-congestion Congestion cost

A

B

GME
OMIE
REST

GME
OMIE
REST

12.11
6.94
1.52

11.57
7.03
1.43

-0.86
0.17
0.19

-1.77
0.36
0.64

about 2.8% while Option B a loss of about 3.7%. In de-
tails, Table 7 shows the distribution of the congestion costs
among the three analyzed macro-areas: GME, OMIE and
the CT areas (REST in Table 7). The importing area,
i.e. the GME, is registering a signiﬁcant cost, while the
exporting areas are registering gains, especially the CT
areas.

5.2.4. The impact of the two options on all TSs in CT

Firstly, the TV of all TSs is shown in Fig. 13 for the
Benchmark. Here, the maximum TV is 4093 MWh at
7th TS and the minimum TV is zero. It should be empha-
sized that the TV decreases with time because the trading
periods get shorter, result which is coralated with the op-
timization problem characteristics of Fig. 6.

Figure 12: Available capacity on the radial path SVIZ-CH and CH-
FR before and after the IDM

Fig. 12 shows the most limiting of the two (the maxi-
mum, as they are negative numbers) before and after the
execution of the IDM, only for Option A-congestion
case since the energy exchange of Option B-congestion
is almost the same (see Fig. 10). It can be observed that
the available import capacity is very limited and that in
almost all the hours it is fully exploited by the IDM.

Period 21 represents a particular case for GME. Here,
only the FRAN-FR intra-border interconnector allows GME
import. When compared against Fig. 10b, Fig. 11b shows
that the available capacity is not fully exploited in both
Options.

In general, the presence of congestions gives rise to con-
gestion costs, also known as the dead-weight loss, as the
optimal economical surplus of the market (the SW) is neg-
atively aﬀected. The congestion cost can be calculated as
the SW diﬀerence between the non-congestion and con-
gestion scenarios for the two Options, separately. With
reference to Table 5, globally, Option B produces higher
congestion costs: Option A registers a loss in the SW of

16

Figure 13: The TV of all TSs in the CT of the Benchmark

Fig. 14 shows the deviation of both Option A and
Option B with respect to the Benchmark for the con-
gestion scenario (Fig. 14a) and the non-congestion sce-
nario (Fig. 14b). The results indicate that the TV in CT
of Option B is higher than that of Option A for both
scenarios, considered separately. Moreover, these ﬁnding
also show that the TV in CT of the non-congestion sce-
nario is more than that of the congestion scenario, e.g.
the maximum deviation of TV of the congestion sce-
nario is 4054 MWh in the 171th TS, meanwhile in non-
congestion scenario, the deviation of TV in the 171th TS
is 5271 MWh and the maximum is 7083 MWh in the 147th
TS.

Moreover, the TV of GME and OMIE for all TSs in
the CT are also shown in Table 8 for the total TV, and
Fig. 15 and Fig. 16 for each TS, respectively. The TV

15913172124Periods-4000-200002000Imp/Exp Capacity [MWh]ES-FR ExportES-FR Import15913172124Periods-1500-1000-5000Import Capacity [MWh]FRAN-FRAUST-DESVIZ-CHCH-DECH-FR15913172124Periods-400-2000Import Capacity [MWh] Max(SVIZ-CH, CH-FR) InitialMax(SVIZ-CH, CH-FR) Final151101151195Trading Sessions01000200030004000Trading Volume [MWh](a)

(b)
Figure 14: The deviation of TV of Option A and Option B
with respect to the Benchmark: (14a) Congestion and (14b) Non-
Congestion

Table 8: The total TV of GME and OMIE in all TSs in the CT in
MWh

Cases

Options GME OMIE

Congestion

Non-congestion

A
B

A
B

525
30742

13395
55305

1736
7462

13401
46439

of GME and OMIE in the CT of Option B are always
higher than that of Option A in both congestion and
non-congestion scenarios when compared separately for
each of the two scenarios (see Table 8 and the curves rep-
resenting Option B are always above the curves repre-
senting Option A in Fig. 15 and Fig. 16). This can be
seen when comparing ﬁrst row against second row of Ta-
ble 8 for the congestion scenario, third row against forth
row of Table 8 for the non-congestion scenario, from Fig
15a and Fig. 16a for the congestion scenario, and Fig.
15b and Fig. 16b for the non-congestion scenario. In
general, these results show that a higher degree of DA-CT
integration (Option B) leads to an increase in the TV
with respect to a lower degree of coordination (Option
A). When the impact of the ATC limits on each Option
is evaluated (ﬁrst row against third row and second row
against forth row of Table 8, respectively) a large increase
of the TV for both Options is noticed. This result conﬁrm
that the current ATC limits are very stringent.

It is interesting to note in Table 8 that the TV for
GME in Option B congestion scenario (30742 MWh) is
higher than that in Option A non-congestion scenario

(a)

(b)

Figure 15: The TV of all TSs in CT of GME: (15a) Congestion and
(15b) Non-Congestion

(13395 MWh). This is explained by the lack of the two
DAs of Option A in Option B and their insertion in the
CT of Option B, where they are cleared mostly locally
due to the presence of the ATC limits. In details, Option
B imports a high TV from the DAs of Option A, this
TV does not appear in the numbers reported in Table 8
for Option A but it appear in Option B.

Fig. 15 shows that for Option B the TV of GME
in the CT signiﬁcantly increases in some TSs in the con-
from 87th
gestion and non-congestion scenarios, i.e.
TS to 105th TS and from 135th TS to 177th TS, while
the maximum TV over all TSs of the congestion scenario
(4067 MWh) is almost the same with that of the non-
congestion scenario (4137 MWh). This is again explained
by the lack of the two DAs of Option A in Option B
and their insertion in the CT of Option B, where they are
cleared. Moreover, this is what gives the spikes of Option
B in Fig. 14 and Fig. 15, respectively.

Regarding Fig. 16, it is interesting to point out that
the shape of either Fig. 16a and Fig. 16b is more or
less the same between the 1st TS and the 140th TS but
not for the rest, in particular for Option B of the non-
congestion scenario. In this case, the suppliers in OMIE
can match with demand orders from the entire Europe,
including GME, as there is ATC available. In fact, for the
TSs for which the spikes in Fig. 16b are recorded the ex-
ports from OMIE increase and, at the same time, a similar
amount of energy is imported by GME; e.g. in the 141th
TS, OMIE exports 2934 MWh while GME imports 2560
MWh. Thus, it can be said that the cheaper generators
from OMIE push the more expensive generators of GME

17

151101151195Trading Sessions-5000150035004500Trading Volume [MWh]Option AOption B151101151195Trading Sessions01500350055007500Trading Volume [MWh]Option AOption B151101151195Trading Sessions01000200030004100Trading Volume [MWh]Option AOption B151101151195Trading Sessions01000200030004200Trading Volume [MWh]Option AOption B(a)

(b)
Figure 16: The TV of all TSs in CT of OMIE: (16a) Congestion and
(16b) Non-Congestion

in the out-of-price area: the demand bids of the GME are
matched against those from other countries while the sur-
plus of generation in OMIE is exported. This happens in
Option B for the CT TSs where the bids of the missing
GME DAs of Option A are present (compare Fig. 16b
with Fig. 15b).

5.2.5. The impact of the two options on DAs in GME and

OMIE

First of all, the SW in Me, TV in MWh, and Volume
Weighted Average Price (VWAP) in e/MWh5 of each DA
of the Benchmark are presented in Table 9. Then the
deviation of SW in e, TV in MWh, and VWAP in per-
centage of Option A and Option B with respect to the
Benchmark are shown in Table 10 for the congestion
and non-congestion scenarios. Here, VWAP is deﬁned
as the volume weighted average price to buy or sell 1 MWh
using (34) 6. In these Tables, the DAs of GME are denoted
by MI1-MI5 and the DAs of OMIE are denoted by SO1-
SO6. Finally, as explained in Section 5.1 it is reminded
that the MI3 of Option B corresponds to MI4 of Option
A reason why the results of Option B are given for MI4
instead of MI3.

5The payment method in DA based on the market clearing price.
6

k
r
a
m
h
c
n
e
B
e
h
t

f
o
A
D
h
c
a
e

f
o

)
P
A
W
V
(

e
c
i
r
P
e
g
a
r
e
v
A
d
e
t
h
g
i
e

W

e
m
u
l
o
V
d
n
a

,

V
T

,

W
S

e
h
T

:
9

e
l
b
a
T

6
O
S

5
O
S

4
O
S

3
O
S

2
O
S

1
O
S

5
I
M

4
I
M

3
I
M

2
I
M

1
I
M

s
A
D

6
2
.
9
7
6

0
2
.
6
2
4

0
9
.
7
3
5

2
7
.
6
8
6

1
3
.
2
4
9

3
4
.
4
5
6
3

1
2
.
8
6
6
1

9
6
.
8
4
3
2

9
9
.
3
8
7

1
7
.
6
5
3
1

9
7
.
7
6
8
5

]

e
M

[

W
S

2
8
9
7
7
1

9
5
1
1

0
7
8
0
1

7
9
5
2
2

4
9
6
2
2

6
3
8
5
8

5
0
4
4
2

3
9
3
5
2

0
8
3
2
2

6
6
0
9
4

8
1
8
3
0
1

]

h
W
M

[

V
T

8
8
.
2
2

8
9
.
3
2

9
5
.
6
2

1
.
5
2

9
9
.
1
2

8
5
.
2
2

1
6
.
8
5

1
1
.
7
4

5
0
.
6
4

7
1
.
9
3

3
5
.
8
3

]

h
W
M
/
e

[

P
A
W
V

V W AP =

(cid:80)

(cid:80)

(cid:80)

a∈Ap
(cid:80)

t∈T h
p
(cid:80)

s∈Sa
(cid:80)

a∈Ap

t∈T h
p

s∈Sa

(xt

s · Qt
(xt

s · λt
a)
s · Qt
s)

(34)

where λt
which is also equal to the market clearing price of area a.

a is the Lagrange multiplier of the balancing equation (5),

18

151101151195Trading Sessions0100200300350Trading Volume [MWh]Option AOption B151101151195Trading Sessions0100020003000Trading Volume [MWh]Option AOption B6
O
S

5
O
S

4
O
S

3
O
S

2
O
S

1
O
S

5
I
M

4
I
M

3
I
M

2
I
M

1
I
M

A
D

s
n
o
i
t
p
O

s
e
s
a
C

s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
c
-
n
o
n

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
c

e
h
t

n

i

k
r
a
m
h
c
n
e
B
e
h
t

h
t
i
w
B
n
o
i
t
p
O
d
n
a
A
n
o
i
t
p
O

f
o
A
D
h
c
a
e

f
o
P
A
W
V
d
n
a

,

V
T

,

W
S

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
d

e
h
T

:
0
1

e
l
b
a
T

0

0

7
1
.
0
-

0

0

7
1
.
0
-

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

4
4

0

8
0
.
0

2
1
.
0

8
1
.
0
-

0

0

0

0

7
0
.
0
-

2
0
.
0

0

4
5
3

8
0
.
0

0

0

2
2
.
0
-

8
0
.
0
-

8
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

0

0

0

4
4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3
0
.
0
-

0

0

0

0

0

a

0

0

0

1
0
.
0

5
1
.
0
-

3
0
.
0
-

2
5
5
2

3
8
1

9
4
.
0
-

b
1
7
0
3

2
5
1

8
9
.
0
-

2
9
1
2
7

2
6
5
5

8
8
.
8
1
-

1
5
9
9
5

0
8
8
4

8
6
.
7
1
-

8
2

0
1

0

a

9
3
9

5
5

4
0
.
0
-

6
9
0
2
2

8
1
5
1

3
4
.
1
-

6
9
0
2
2

8
1
5
1

3
4
.
1
-

3
1
2
1
7

3
1
8
5

6
5
.
3
-

3
1
2
1
7

3
1
8
5

6
5
.
3
-

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

]

e

[

W
S

]

h
W
M

[

V
T

]

%

[

P
A
W
V

]

e

[

W
S

]

h
W
M

[

V
T

]

%

[

P
A
W
V

]

e

[

W
S

]

h
W
M

[

V
T

]

%

[

P
A
W
V

]

e

[

W
S

]

h
W
M

[

V
T

]

%

[

P
A
W
V

A

B

A

B

n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
C

n
o
i
t
s
e
g
n
o
c
-
n
o
N

3

.
g
i
F

n

i

3
I
M
o
t

d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c
B
n
o
i
t
p
O
n

i

4
I
M

B
n
o
i
t
p
O
n

i

d
e
t
a
n
m

i

i
l
e

e
r
a

5
I
M
d
n
a

3
I
M

a

b

19

As explained in Section 4.1, only two DAs are oper-
ated as CRA, i.e. MI2 and MI4 of GME while the others
(including OMIE DAs) are operated in an uncoupled fash-
ion. For this reason, the impact of the two Options on
the DAs sessions is major for only the MI2 and MI4 (two
grey columns of Table 10). Here, the eﬀect is very positive
in both congestion and non-congestion scenarios when
compared to the Benchmark: (i) the SW increases by up
to 22096 e in the congestion scenario (MI2, both Op-
tions) and up to 72192 e in the non-congestion scenario
(MI4, Option A); (ii) the TV increases by up to 1518
MWh in the congestion scenario (MI2, both Options)
and up to 5813 MWh in the non-congestion scenario
(MI2, both Options); (iii) the VWAP decreases by up to
-1.43% in the congestion scenario (MI2, both Options)
and up to -18.88% in the non-congestion scenario (MI4,
Option A). Clearly, the results of the non-congestion
scenario are signiﬁcantly better than the results of the
congestion scenario for both Options, which shows the
limiting impact of the tight ATCs on the DA-CT intercon-
nectors. Finally, it is interesting to note that the results
for MI2 in both Options are identical for both scenarios:
this is because up to the MI3 session, the two Options are
identical (MI3 is in Option A but is missing from Option
B).

For the sessions which are not operated as CRAs (white
colors of Table 10), so are still uncoupled, the impact of
market integration is minimal and indirect: the changes
that can be seen in Table 10 are very small when com-
pared to the results of MI2 and MI4 and they are due to
the update of the ATC of the interconnectors inside the
DA areas during the previous CT and/or CRA sessions.
The scale of these updates are small as the interconnec-
tors inside the DA areas are already congested (or close to
congestion) in the DAM and the IDM solution is pushing
the ﬂows in the congested direction in most of the cases.
However, these small changes are generally positive since
the SW and the TV register small increases with respect
to the Benchmark while the VWAP generally registers
small decreases with respect to the Benchmark.

The impact of the two CRAs on the TV of participants
in GME is investigated separately for the supply and the
demand side in Table 11. Here, the deviations introduced
by the two Options with respect to the Benchmark is
shown. The TV of supply and demand in the Benchmark
is the same because the interconnectors inside GME do
not have losses in the market model, i.e. 24533 MWh for
MI2 and 12696 MWh for MI4. Finally, it should be noted
that the results in Table 11 only represent the supply and
demand inside GME, while the results of CRAs in Table
10 consider the entire study case.

Qualitatively, the results of Table 11 are: (i) the TV of
supply always decreases while the TV of demand always
increases; (ii) in absolute values the TV of the demand is
always smaller than the TV of the supply and (iii) in abso-
lute values, the results of the non-congestion scenario are
much higher than the results of the congestion scenario.

Table 11: The TV of supply and demand of CRAs of Option A and
Option B in GME in MWh

Options DAs

Congestion

Non-congestion

Supply Demand

Supply Demand

A

B

MI2

MI4

MI2

MI4

-1012

-185

-1012

-246

535

0

535

-5

-3598

-2324

-3598

-2001

2715

2739

2715

2398

These results show that, on one hand, the more expensive
generators of GME loose the opportunity to trade in front
of the cheaper generation available in the areas outside the
GME. Moreover, this also determines the increased of the
accepted demand from inside the GME. Finally, the neat
diﬀerence between the congestion and non-congestion
scenarios shows, again, the limiting impact on the TV of
the currently tight ATCs on the DA-CT interconnectors.

6. Conclusion

According to the requirements of the Continuous Trad-
ing Matching Algorithm, the paper developed a uniﬁed
mathematical model to run the integrated European IDM.
Moreover, an iterative process is proposed to run a whole
length of IDM in Europe with any level of coordination
between DA and CT. The numerical performance of the
model and of the iterative process is validated by a re-
alistic case study which is created based on the current
European IDM structure and data. Two oﬃcial DA-CT
coordination proposals, one of GME and one of OMIE are
simulated by the iterative process. These proposals show
many advantages of the single European IDM, however,
there are some disadvantages as well.

In detail, the integrated European IDM seems very
promising since the players of both GME and OMIE can
approach the cheaper bids from other countries. There-
fore, this implementation also requires Italian and Iberian
suppliers to change their behaviour and bid in a proﬁtable
way. However, the more expensive suppliers, e.g. those
of GME, become uncompetitive and they would need to
change their bidding strategy or invest to make the plants
more cost-eﬃcient or even invest into cost-eﬃcient plants.
To clearly understand the optimal behaviour, other types
of mathematical approaches are required, e.g. game the-
ory or reinforcement learning. However, their eﬃcient use
requires a correct representation of the market rules. The
paper provides this under the form of a complex Mixed
Integer Linear Problem model, so the building block for
future studies has been put.

Moreover, the outcome of the non-congestion sce-
nario is always better than that of the congestion sce-
nario in terms of SW, liquidity and VWAP when they
are compared for each Option, separately. Therefore, the
insuﬃciency of the ATC of interconnectors signiﬁcantly
minimizes the positive impact of the integrated European

IDM. The paper went deeper and identiﬁed the inter-
connectors that limit the commercial exchanges between
countries and evaluated their ﬁnancial impact. From this
point on, the proposed model can be used to evaluate the
changes needed to alleviate the problems: further increase
of the transmission capacities and the redeﬁnition of the
market areas being among possible investigations that can
be performed by the TSOs to deﬁne their future strategies.
Finally, the proposed model is also validated by the
current evolution of the European IDM. The paper shows
that Option B is the better option for the integration of
OMIE and GME; however Option A is more near to the
current national market structure, so it is the to go option
for a fast integration. In real-life, OMIE has recently been
integrated with Option A but is expected to change to
Option B. Thus, the proposed model shows the ability
to correctly evaluate a real-life situation so it represents
a reliable tool for future studies like the ones mentioned
in the previous paragraphs and/or others, e.g. the future
evolution of the generation park towards greener technolo-
gies or future evolution of the market rules. Last but not
least, this also means that the PXs can use the proposed
model to clear the market.

References

the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions

[1] T. E. parliament, the council of the European Union, Reg-
ulation (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and
of
for ac-
cess to the natural gas transmission networks and repeal-
ing Regulation (EC) No 1775/2005 (Text with EEA rel-
evance), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/
?uri=OJ:L:2009:211:TOC (2009).

[2] EPEXSPOT, pcr: Price coupling, https://www.epexspot.com/

en/market-coupling/pcr.

[3] L. H. Lam, V. Ilea, C. Bovo, Impact of the price coupling of
regions project on the day-ahead electricity market in italy, in:
2017 IEEE Manchester PowerTech, 2017, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/
PTC.2017.7981215.

[4] E. Commission, Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24

July 2015 (2015).
URL
?uri=CELEX:32015R1222&qid=1496153489245

http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/ALL/

[5] TenneT, European target model, day-ahead market coupling.

URL
german-market/congestion-management/
european-target-model/

https://www.tennet.eu/electricity-market/

[6] E. Commission, XBID Market Project (2015).

URL
MercatoElettrico/XBID.aspx

http://www.mercatoelettrico.org/En/Mercati/

[7] C. Regulation, Nemos-proposal (2017).

URL
all-nemos-consultation/

http://www.europex.org/external-consultations/

[8] N. Committee, Intraday Algorithm Requirements (2016).

URL
MercatoElettrico/XBID.aspx

http://www.mercatoelettrico.org/En/Mercati/

[9] GME, Consultation Paper on Intraday Coupling model for

Italian Borders (2017).
URL
http://www.admie.gr/fileadmin/groups/EDLES_DHEP/
2016_Auction_Rules/Consultation_paper_on_complementary_
auctions_final.pdf

[10] OMIE, Operating proposal for the intra-day market in MIBEL

(2017).
URL
20FOR%20THE%20INTRADAY%20MARKET%20IN%20MIBEL.pdf

http://www.omie.es/files/OPERATING%20PROPOSAL%

20

[11] OMIE, New Continuous Intraday Market in MIBEL (2018).

URL
20180606_WEBINAR_ENG.PDF

http://www.nuevomercadointradiario.omie.es/docs/

[12] R. Scharﬀ, M. Amelin, Trading behaviour on the continuous
intraday market elbas, Energy Policy 88 (2016) 544 – 557.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.10.045.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0301421515301713

[13] J. Chaves- ´Avila, C. Fernandes, The spanish intraday market
design: A successful solution to balance renewable genera-
tion?, Renewable Energy 74 (2015) 422 – 432.
doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.08.017.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960148114004765

[14] S. Hagemann, C. Weber, Trading volumes in intraday mar-
kets: Theoretical reference model and empirical observations
in selected european markets, Tech. rep., EWL Working Paper
(2015).

[15] K. Neuhoﬀ, N. Ritter, A. Salah-Abou-El-Enien, P. Vassilopou-
los, Intraday markets for power: Discretizing the continuous
trading?, DIW Discussion Papers 1544, Berlin (2016).

[16] R. Kiesel, F. Paraschiv, Econometric analysis of 15-minute in-
traday electricity prices, Energy Economics 64 (2017) 77 – 90.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2017.03.002.
[17] C. Pape, The impact of intraday markets on the market value
of ﬂexibility—decomposing eﬀects on proﬁle and the imbalance
costs, Energy Economics 76 (2018) 186–201.

[18] D. Newbery, G. Strbac, I. Viehoﬀ, The beneﬁts of integrating
european electricity markets, Energy Policy 94 (2016) 253 – 263.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.03.047.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0301421516301513

[19] D. Newbery, M. G. Pollitt, R. A. Ritz, W. Strielkowski, Mar-
ket design for a high-renewables european electricity system,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 91 (2018) 695–707.
[20] A. Marien, P. Luickx, A. Tirez, A continuous intraday trading
model in a cacm fg compliant world, in: 11th International
Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM14), 2014,
pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/EEM.2014.6861242.

[21] L. H. Lam, V. Ilea, C. Bovo, European day-ahead electricity
market coupling: Discussion, modeling, and case study, Elec-
tric Power Systems Research 155 (Supplement C) (2018) 80 –
92. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2017.10.003.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S037877961730398X

[22] L. H. Lam, V. Ilea, C. Bovo, A thorough comparison among
various mathematical approaches to compute pun in italy, in:
2018 15th International Conference on the European Energy
Market (EEM), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.

[23] I. Savelli, B. Corn´elusse, A. Giannitrapani, S. Paoletti, A. Vi-
cino, A new approach to electricity market clearing with uniform
purchase price and curtailable block orders, Applied Energy 226
(2018) 618–630.

[24] P. project, Pcr stakeholder (2016).

URL http://www.mercatoelettrico.org/En/MenuBiblioteca/
Documenti/20160120EuphemiaStakeholderForum11Jan2016.pdf

[25] P. C. of Regions, EUPHEMIA Public Description (2016).

URL https://www.epexspot.com/en/market-coupling/pcr
[26] EPEXSPOT, intra-day lead time, https://www.epexspot.com/

en/product-info/intradaycontinuous/intraday_lead_time.

[27] Noor Pool, intra-day in germany, http://nordpoolspot.com/

TAS/intraday-trading/continuous-intraday-in-germany/.

[28] GME,

public-domain

bids/oﬀers,

http://www.

mercatoelettrico.org/En/Esiti/MGP/EsitiMGP.aspx.

[29] OMIE,

intraday market, http://www.omie.es/files/flash/

ResultadosMercado.swf.

[30] EPEXSPOT, market data, https://www.epexspot.com/en/

market-data.

[31] EPEXSPOT, epex spot market rule, https://www.epexspot.

com/en/extras/download-center.

[32] CWE, The Central West Europe intraday ATC Capacity

Calculation process after Flow-Based Market Coupling (2015).
URL
http://www.elia.be/en/products-and-services/
cross-border-mechanisms/transmission-capacity-at-borders/
calculation-methods#anchor6

[33] ENTSO-E, Cross Border Intraday (XBID) Trading Solution

Pre-launch Event (2018).
URL http://www.mercatoelettrico.org/En/MenuBiblioteca/
Documenti/20180131_XBIDpresentation_golive_launch_
event.pdf

[34] D. I. Chatzigiannis, G. A. Dourbois, P. N. Biskas, A. G.
Bakirtzis, European day-ahead electricity market clearing
model, Electric Power Systems Research 140 (2016) 225 – 239.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2016.06.019.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0378779616302279

[35] CWE-TSOs,

capacity,
intraday-capacity.com/portal/php/main.php.
capacity,
elbas

available

transfer

initial

Spot,

[36] Nordpool

http://www.

http://www.

nordpoolspot.com/Market-data1/Elbas/Market-data13/
Initial-capacity/Norway4/?view=table.

[37] Joint Allocation Oﬃce, intrday auction, http://www.jao.eu/

marketdata/intradayauctions.

[38] N. Pool, Trading capacities, http://www.nordpoolspot.com/

[39] NORDPOOL,

TAS/Day-ahead-market-Elspot/Trading-capacities/.
statistics,
pool
//www.nordpoolgroup.com/Market-data1/Intraday/
Market-data1/Market-data1/Overview/?view=table.

intraday

nord

https:

[40] GAMS, general algebraic modeling system, https://www.gams.

com/.
[41] Mathworks,

mathworks.com.

programming

fundamentals,

http://www.

[42] Microsoft,

oﬃce

365,

https://www.microsoftstore.

com/store/mseea/it_IT/cat/categoryID.70174300?icid=
HP-Spotlight4-Office-051717-it_IT.

A. An example of the execution of Discrete Auc-

tion and Continuous Trading

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 17: The example of the execution of DA and CT: (17a)
The time-line of submitting bids, (17b) Execution of CT, and (17c)
Execution of DA

A simple example is given in Fig. 17a where three bids
are submitted to the market at diﬀerent coming time (T i
s)
for the 12th period, including two supply bids (S1 and S2)

21

00:0012:0001:0002:0003:0004:0005:0006:0007:0008:0009:0010:0011:00S1: - Quantity: 60 MWh- Price: 50 €/MWh- Period: 12hD1: - Quantity: 100 MWh- Price: 100 €/MWh- Period: 12hS2: - Quantity: 60 MWh- Price: 10 €/MWh- Period: 12hMWh€/MWh6010012005010100SW = 6600 €MWh€/MWh6010012005010100SW = 7400 €and one demand bid (D1). In CT, the market is executed
whenever a new bid arrives, thus the market is executed
three times as follows:

1. Up to period 05:00, there is no bid accepted as there

is only S1 in SOB;

2. At period 06:00, S1 is fully accepted (60 MWh), and
D1 is partially accepted (60 MWh). At this point,
the SW equals to 3000 e;

3. At period 10:00, the rest of D1 is fully accepted (40
MWh) and S2 is partially accepted (40 MWh). For
this CT session, the SW equals to 3600 e.

Therefore, the total SW is 6600 e and the total TV
is 200 MWh as shown in Fig. 17b where the equivalent
cumulated curved for period 12:00 overall CT sessions is
shown.

If the same bids are run in a DA session for period 12:00
with all the bids, the market is executed at a ﬁxed point in
time, it means that all bids are executed at the same time.
Therefore, supposing that the market is executed after S2
arrived, the total SW is 7400 e and the total TV is 200
MWh (see Fig. 17c).

In conclusion, it is clear that with the same submitted
bids but diﬀerent execution times, the market solutions of
CT and DA are diﬀerent.

22

View publication stats
View publication stats

