ARTICLES
CREDIT VALUE ADJUSTMENT AND ECONOMIC DOI:10.18267/j.pep.517
MOTIVATION TO TRADE ON PXE
Igor 1Paholok*
Abstract:
Electricity forward contracts can normally be traded in two ways in the Czech Republic: OTC
forwards, which means bilaterally or bilaterally through a broker, and futures through the Power
Exchange Central Europe. Each way has its own economic pros and cons. As the most crucial point,
a counterparty risk and costs of funding are usually mentioned. Contracts traded on the power
exchange bear less or no credit risk, as every deal is paired via central counterparty. On the other
hand, the power exchange requires a margin deposit and daily profi t and loss settlement which
might increase funding costs. The fact that the counterparty risk is lower for exchange contracts
with higher funding costs is well-known, but rarely quantifi ed. We use the so-called Credit Value
Adjustment concept in order to quantify the market value of the credit risk. We compare this value
with potential funding costs. The aim of this paper is to compare both the OTC and exchange ways
of trading using risk-adjusted economic characteristics.
Keywords: Credit Value Adjustment, counterparty risk, power futures, futures margining, Merton
model, Wiener process
JEL Classifi cation: C53, G17, Q47, Q49
1. Introduction
The recent fi nancial crisis reveals shortcomings of common risk management standards.
For the purpose of this paper, we have chosen to focus on the concept called Credit Value
Adjustment (CVA). CVA is the difference between the risk-free portfolio value and true
portfolio value that takes into account the possibility of counterparty’s default. In other
words, CVA is the market value of counterparty credit risk.
Having such a powerful tool as CVA, we can quantify the market value of credit/
counterparty risk. With knowledge about initial margin parameters on futures exchange,
level of interest rates and futures prices volatilities, we can quantify the expected value of
funding costs generated by the need of keeping cash blocked as an initial margin and cash
readiness to cover daily settlement of variation margin. Finally, we can compare the CVA
with the costs of funding and decide whether it is more benefi cial to trade via a power
1 Igor Paholok, University of Economics, Faculty of Finance and Accounting, Prague
(paholok@institutee.cz).
The research has been supported by the Czech Science Foundation Grant No. 402/09/0732 “Market
Risk and Financial Derivatives”. This paper was supported by Grant IG102030, Project title:
“Chování investičních instrumentů v kontextu fi nančních krizí“, Project No. 8/2010.
Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS 245

exchange or OTC. We presume that trading via power exchange bears no credit risk,
but evokes costs of funding. On the other hand, OTC trading normally bears non-zero
credit risk but is less expensive from a funding point of view, with other conditions (fees,
market liquidity, non-economic and administrative consequences) ceteris paribus.
As we do not have suffi cient historical data about energy companies’ probabilities
of default over time and their reactions to the movement of power contracts price, we
can work only with model based data. To do so, we use a modifi ed Merton model (see
for example Yi, Tchernitser, Hurd, 2009) with a predefi ned matrix with initial values
of the solvency ratios (asset over debt) and the ratios’ volatilities. Data about historical
prices’ volatilities are captured directly from the Power Exchange Central Europe for
Czech market and data about related interest rates are market based as well.
The next section introduces the models applied, and in Section Three we present
the models’ applications. The conclusion of the results is summarized in the Section Four.
2. Model Defi nition
In this section, we defi ne the mathematical fundamentals of the modifi ed Merton model,
Credit Value Adjustment, and we defi ne the funding costs and fi nally we present the way
of economic comparison of OTC and exchange type of trading.
2.1 Counterparty risk and credit value adjustment
Counterparty credit risk is the risk that the counterparty to a fi nancial or commodity contract
will default prior to the expiration of the contract and will not make all the payments required
by the contract. There are two features that set counterparty risk apart from more traditional
forms of credit risk: the uncertainty of exposure and bilateral nature of credit risk (Pykhtin
and Zhu, 2007). Whenever a counterparty in a derivative contract defaults, the subject loses
the positive present value of this contract. This type of loss is usually called the contract’s
replacement costs. If the present value is zero or negative, the subject’s loss is zero.
If the value of contract i at time t is V(t), the contract level exposure E(t) is:
i i
E tmaxV t,0 (2.1)
i i
Only current exposure is known with certainty, while future exposure is uncertain.
We apply a path-dependent simulation in order to generate possible market scenarios
and, consequently, the possible future value of the contract level exposure. The stochastic
differential equation is usually used and the generalized geometric Brownian motion
(GBM) is frequently used for modelling FX rates and stock indices:
dX(t) = μX(t) dt + σX(t) dW (2.2)
t
Where X(t) is the value of a market factor which is supposed to be simulated, μ is
drift and σ is deterministic volatility. W is a Wiener process. The analytical solution of
t
the stochastic differential equation is
 1  
Xt t Xtexp  2t Wt

(2.3)
 2  
To keep it simple, we also use GBM for electricity future prices modelling, however,
the appropriateness of this application could be discussed. The usage of a more suitable
model is analysed in the Section Three of this paper (the jump diffusion mean reverting
246 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015

model is more suitable for an electricity spot price series and the two factors model for an
electricity forward/futures price series).
After the simulation (k simulated paths) of market factors is completed we can
evaluate the exposure. The conditional valuation is given by
|     |             |     |    |           |     |        |    |       |
| --- | ----------- | --- | --- | --------- | --- | ------ | --- | ----- |
|     |            |     |    |          |     |      | k  |       |
|     | V t,Xtk |     | EV | t,Xtk |     | Xtx |     | (2.4) |
|     | i           | j1 |     | MTM       | j1 |        | j   |       |
|     |             |     |     |           |     |        | j1 |       |
Having conditional contract value, we can quantify potential discounted loss L* by
B
|     |     | L  |     | 1R | 0 E  |     |     | (2.5) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | ----- | ------- | --- | --- | ----- |
1
|     |     |     | T |     | B   |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | ----- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
t
Denoting the time of counterparty default by τ, B is the future value of one unit
t
of the base currency invested today at the prevailing interest rate for t r. R denotes
t
recovery rate, a constant fraction of exposure which will be paid by the counterparty
in case of default. T is the maturity of the contract (or the time until we intend to keep
position) and 1 is the indicator function that takes the value of one if the argument is true
(.)
(and zero otherwise). n represents the number of years.
The Credit Value Adjustment is consequently given by the risk-neutral expectation
of the discounted loss. The risk-neutral expectation of Equation 2.5 can be written as
|     |        |    |       | T   | B         |         |     |       |
| --- | ------ | --- | ------ | --- | ---------- | -------- | --- | ----- |
|     | CVAEQ | L*  | 1R | EQ | 0 Ett | dPD0,T |     |       |
|     |        |     |        |     |           |          |     | (2.6) |
|     |        |     |        |     | B         |         |     |       |
|     |        |     |        | 0   | t          |          |     |       |

Where PD(0,t) is the risk-neutral probability of counterparty default between times 0 and T.
In reality, we have to calculate with the counterparty level exposure (instead
of contract level exposure) including all netting and collateral agreements. However, for
the purposes of this paper, we work on a contract level without a collateral.
2.2  Modifi ed Merton model
As mentioned above, we have insuffi cient data about companies’ default probabilities and
their possible reaction to the movement of electricity contracts prices. Hence, we apply
the so-called structural model of credit risk, the modifi ed version of the Merton model.
The solvency ratio (asset over debt) Y has an initial value of Y , which can be observed
|     |     |     | t   |     |     |     | 0   |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
directly from companies’ balance sheet. Based on the model, we assume that the solvency
ratio Y is specifi ed to be a Geometric Brownian motion (GMB). When the solvency ratio
t
is lower than one (or log of the solvency ratio lower than 0), a company is technically in
default, because the value of assets is lower than the value of debts. We suppose that an
underlying contract matures at a future time T, therefore the default situation is defi ned
as a state, when Y  is lower than one. Paths of Y development are simulated using GMB,
|     | T   |     |     |     | t   |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
with simplifi cation, that we do not consider a drift parameter:
|     |     |     | Y   | Y  | W   |     |     | (2.7) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | ----- | --- | --- | --- | ----- |
|     |     |     | t   | 0     | Y t |     |     |       |
Where W is the Wiener process and σ  is volatility of the solvency ratio. The initial value
| t   |     |     | Y   |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
of the solvency ratio Y , can be observed from a company’s balance sheet. However, we
0
are limited by the fact that the balance sheet shows a company’s state at a specifi c time,
rather than the state over time. The volatility of the solvency ratio σ  cannot be directly
Y
| Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     |     |     |     |     | 247 |
| ----------------------------- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

observed, but could be estimated by a particular rating model. σ  depends on a company’s
Y
strategy, level of risk management and portfolio diversifi cation, the volatility of electricity
contract prices etc.
The solvency ratio is usually defi ned as the assets over debt ratio (or log of the assets
over debt ratio). Using this defi nition, we defi ne the default as a state when Y is lower
t
than one (zero in case of logarithm).
The default probability for time T, PD(T) can be calculated by conditioning
|     |     |     |     | PDT:E |    |      |   |     |       |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | -------- | --- | ----- | --- | --- | ----- |
|     |     |     |     |          | P   | Y 1Y |     |     | (2.8) |
|     |     |     |     |          |     | T     | 0   |     |       |
In Equation 2.6 we calculate with PD(0,T), but we get PD(T) using the modifi ed
Merton model. For the purpose of this paper, we assume that the difference between both
PDs is very close to zero (we work with the time horizon within one year) and therefore
we can substitute PD(0,T) with PD(T).
2.3  Funding costs
As was already mentioned, trading via an exchange is usually connected to additional
funding costs. The fi rst type of such costs is given by the obligation to deposit the required
margin. The amount of the required margin is set by the margin coeffi cient M  which is set
ex
by an exchange (we do not consider the right of clearing participant to set the higher margin
requirements) for each type of the traded contracts. Whenever a trading participant opens
a position he is obliged to deposit the margin. This deposited margin yields an interest, which
is usually lower than the market interest rate for an overnight period. Normally we intend
to keep position for a longer time (until time T) than the overnight period is. The difference
between the market rate for period (0,T) and the exchange yield for deposited margins
is expressed as (r rexx)T/n where r  represents interest rate for particular period, rex
0,T
(0,T)
represents yield paid by an exchange or clearinghouse and n represents the number of years.
The cost of the margin deposit is given by the following equation:
|     |     |     | CM = M |     | N(r | reexx)T/n  |     |     | (2.9) |
| --- | --- | --- | ------ | --- | --- | ----------- | --- | --- | ----- |
ex 0,T
where N denotes the number of contracts (or MWh) in an opened position. We can
assume to have one contract, and N equals one.
Another type of funding cost is conditional. Whenever the value of the contract is
lower than the value of the given contract one day before, the trading participant must
settle this mark-to-market loss. This is not required when the contract is traded OTC.
The funding cost of the potential daily loss settlement is therefore given as the sum
of the potential daily losses multiplied by the actual market overnight interest rate rON.
t
OONN
|     |     |     | T   |         |       | r   |      | k   |        |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | -------- | ----- | --- | ----- | ----- | ------ |
|     |     | C   |   | E V V | tN | t   | Xt | x     | (2.10) |
|     |     | MtM |     | 0        | i     |     |       | j    |        |
|     |     |     |     |         |       | 360 |       | j1  |        |
|     |     |     | t0 |          |       |     |       |       |        |
The total amount of funding costs is given by the sum of the cost of margin deposit and
the cost of potential daily loss settlement discounted to the present value by r:
t
|     |    |     |     | T  |     | r O ONN |    | k    1 |    |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ------- | --- | ---------- | --- |
C  M N(r reexx)T/n  E V V tN t Xtx    (2.11)
|     |  ex | 0,T |     |                        |     |     |     |                            |    |
| --- | ---- | ----- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- | ----------------------------- | ----- |
|     |      |       |     | 0                      | i   | 3 6 | 0   | j j1 1                     | r     |
|     |     |       |     | t 0                  |     |     |     |                            |     |
|     | 248  |       |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     |     |     | Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |       |

2.4 Economic motivation to trade via power exchange
As we are able to quantify the potential costs of counterparty risk and the value of the
potential funding costs, we can compare both values. While the potential costs of credit
risk are typical for OTC trading and minimal for exchange trading (and vice versa,
the potential funding costs are more characteristic for an exchange) we can assess
the economic motivation to trade in each way. We assume that the other parameters which
can infl uence the traders’ motivations are not relevant (e.g. fees, liquidity, administrative
obligations are the same or very similar). The situation when we are indifferent to each
way of trading could be defi ned as an equality between the potential costs of credit risk
and the potential funding costs:
| T        | B                  |    |     |     |     |
| -------- | ------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1REQ | 0 EttdPD0,t |     |     |     |     |
|          |                    |     |     |     |     |
B
| 0       | t          |            |           |               |        |
| ------- | ---------- | ----------- | --------- | ------------- | ------ |
|        |            | T          | r OONN    |            | 1     |
|        | reexx)T/n |  V tN | t  Xt | k          |       |
|  M N(r |            | E V       |           | x            | (2.12) |
|  eexx  | 0,T      | 0 i         | 3 6 0     | j j1   1 |     |
|        |            | t 0       |           |            | r     |

We defi ne the PD for which the equation is valid as the Critical PD.
Whenever the potential costs of counterparty risk exceed the potential costs of fun-
ding trading via exchange is more economically effective and vice versa.
Having Equation 2.12, we can examine the optimal way of trading for different PD,
R and underlying asset price (X(t)) volatility. Other parameters are supposed to be exoge-
nous – set by exchange or in the case of interest rates by the money market.
The following section reveals the application of the previously described analysis
on the Czech forwards/futures power market.
3.   Application to the Czech Power Market
In this section, we describe the data we use, the futures market data from the Power
Exchange Central Europe and the related interest rate data for the euro. All data we use
contain historical end of day observations from July 17, 2007 until December 31, 2010.
The data source was the PXE Front End Terminal NG for power futures time series and
Reuters Xtra Terminal for interest rates data.
3.1  Czech power futures data characteristic
Trading with electricity futures contracts had started on July 17, 2007 on the PXE.
The list of traded contracts was continuously extending. The portfolio of traded products
now includes power futures with base load and peak load day time mode of delivery,
month futures with delivery starting from the following month to the next fi ve months,
quarters futures with delivery starting from the following quarter to the next four quarters
and years futures for the following three years. There is physical and fi nancial settlement
for all types of traded futures contracts for the electricity with the delivery location within
| Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     |     | 249 |
| ----------------------------- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- |

the electricity system in the Czech Republic1. More than 190 different contracts have
been traded since the PXE founding.
For the purpose of this essay, we need to examine the development of prices more
closely. From the daily observed closing price we can calculate log returns, which we
can use for the calculation of contracts’ historical2 price volatility σ. As a quite large
amount of contracts has been traded since July 17, 2007, we have to aggregate contracts
according their characteristics into six groups; base load and peak load months, quarters
and years. Extended characteristics of contracts’ volatilities are presented in Appendix 1.
Aggregated characteristics, which we use for CVA calculation, are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 | Characteristics of Historical Volatilities for Particular Contract Groups
Contract type /
1-percentile (%) Average (%) 99-percentile (%) Margin (EUR)
Parameter
BL M 0.01 0.81 1.87 4.5
BL Q 0.01 0.8 2.08 2.9
BL Y 0.01 0.71 1.36 2.7
PL M 0.01 0.83 2.05 7.5
PL Q 0.01 0.81 2.47 3.7
PL Y 0.01 0.82 1.55 3.5
Source: PXE data, author’s analysis
Subsequently we can use the obtained historical volatilities as a parameter for
Equation 2.3 to simulate the paths of the Brownian motion and to evaluate the portfolio
according 2.4. The usage of the Wiener process assumes the normality of daily returns.
However, this assumption is arguable, we work with 190 time series with different
characteristics of returns distribution and therefore, the usage of a proxy distribution
is inescapable. The illustration of the different returns distribution of PXE’s contracts
is illustrated on Figure 1.
In energy companies’ practice, a more sophisticated model than the Wiener process
could be used in the process of contract’s volatility modelling. The Two-Factors Model
(see for example Ruediger, Schindlmayr, Reik (2005)), which incorporates the fact
that the volatility of the contract increase with decreasing time to delivery, could be
a suitable one. Unfortunately, we cannot apply such model in our case, as the contracts’
characteristics have changed dramatically over time since 2007.
At the end of this subsection, it has to be mentioned, that in the true sense of the word
the market data from PXE are not necessarily from the market. Whenever the liquidity is
1 In the PXE, contracts with the delivery location within the electricity system in the Slovakia and
Hungary are also traded. We are concerned with Czech power futures in this paper, however, similar
methodology could be applied also to other countries.
2 Options for Czech power futures are not traded on the PXE. Therefore we cannot use implied
volatilities.
250 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015

low, and no contract is traded during the day, the exchange offi cer might adjust the end
of day prices according particular exchange rules.
Figure 1 | The Illustration of Diff erent Returns Distribution of PXE’s Contracts
Source: PXE data, author’s analysis
3.2 Euro interest rates data characteristic
According to Equation 2.11 the funding costs depend on several interest rates of a particu-
lar currency which is the euro. Compared to OTC trades, the margin set by an exchange
bears only the spot (overnight) rate minus the specifi c adjustment. The difference between
the longer term yield r and the yield which bears margin deposit on an exchange rex is
(0,T)
assumed to be the opportunity costs of the obligation to keep the margin deposit. However,
if we trade rather OTC, we do not have to deposit a margin, and therefore, the particular
amount could be invested. The duration of our alternative investment T equals the length
of the period we intend to keep the position in the particular power futures contract.
The second part of the defi ned funding costs is conditional. Whenever the end of day
valuation, V(t), of contracts we hold in a position on an exchange, decreases under the
i
value at the time of contracts initiating V , we have to settle that negative mark-to-market
0
loss and vice versa. Anytime we open a position on an exchange, we have to take into
account the potential funding costs which arise from the obligation of the daily profi t/loss
settlement. This daily settlement is not common on OTC markets, and if our mark-to-
market position is negative, we do not have to settle it daily. The particular amount might
therefore be invested in the overnight money market with the interest rON.
Deposited margins on PXE bears an interest, which is calculated as the EONIA3
minus 0.08 %. We suppose that we intend to keep position in the particular power future
contract for a one year, therefore, we compare the PXE interest yield with the one-year
deposit rate for the euro. The development of EONIA, the one-year euro deposit interest
3 Effective Overnight Index Average
Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS 251

rate, the euro overnight interest rate, and the difference between one-year euro rate and
the rate paid by PXE for deposited margins since July 17, 2007 is presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2  |  Development of Related Euro Interest Rates
Source: Reuters
After an overview of related interest rate development, it raises the question,
which values of particular interest rates are supposed to be used in CVA and Critical
PD calculation. If we calculate CVA in a real business situation, we should apply an
appropriate interest rate model, for example the Vasicek model, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross model
or Hull-White model, presented for example in Malek (2005). Historical data are used for
model calibration, and current values are used as initial values in the selected interest rate
model. For a historical study as presented in this paper we use an average of historical
observation and the critical values calculated as 1st and 99th percentile, presented in Table 2.
This can be considered as historical simulation.
Table 2  |  Characteristics of Historical Related Euro Interest Rates
| Parameter | 1-percentile (%) | Average (%) | 99-percentile (%) |
| --------- | ---------------- | ----------- | ----------------- |
| rON       | 0.2              | 1.88        | 4.3               |
| r -rex    | 0.27             | 0.95        | 1.62              |
(0,T)
| r   | 1.11 | 2.84 | 5.47 |
| --- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
(0,T)
Source: PXE data, author’s analysis
The results are also more objective than the results we would obtain if we used only
values from the end of 2010.
| 252 |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS | Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |
| --- | --- | ---------------------- | ----------------------------- |

3.3 Modifi ed Merton model and default probabilities calculation
We do not have historical observation about energy companies’ default probabilities.
Instead of historical observation, we use the modifi ed Merton model, as it was described
in Section 2.2. Using a predefi ned range of assets over debt ratio Y=(1.08; 1.53) and
0
a predefi ned range of assets over debt ratio volatility σ =(0.002; 0.02) we obtain a range
Y
of realistic PD. Detailed PD distribution is presented in Appendix 2, graphically in Figure 3.
Figure 3 | Default Probabilities Obtained from the Modifi ed Merton Model
Asset over debt ratio Daily volatility of asset over debt ratio
Source: Author’s analysis
3.4 The CVA and critical PD calculation
The data described in the previous sections are just input parameters for the CVA and
Critical PD calculation.
The historical price volatilities presented in Table 1 are inputs for the portfolio
conditional value calculation. We assume that the portfolio is always composed of one
single contract. CVA is calculated for one MWh of this contract. The PDs are obtained
from the Modifi ed Merton model and the recovery rate is set at 40%, which represents
a market benchmark. The estimation of the recovery rate should be used in the fi rms’
practice for each single counterparty. The average closing prices from December 31, 2010
was set as the starting point X for each simulated time series, for each selected contract
0
type. The period for which we intend to keep the position is set as 250 working days.
We do not consider either of the products cascading4, nor the delivery period.
4 On the accounting day following the last trading day for a particular year futures series, each open
position is replaced with an equivalent three month futures series (for January, February and March)
and three corresponding quarter futures series (quarter for the second, third and fourth quarters).
Each open position in the particular quarter futures series is replaced by an equivalent three month
futures series.
Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS 253
tluafed
fo
ytilibaborP

The illustrative simulation for BL M time series with the average daily volatility
σ = 0.81%; and the initial value EUR 49.75, is depicted in Figure 4. The portfolio
conditional value is set as the 99th percentile of all 10,000 simulated paths. We use
the maximum of the conditional value series as an input for the CVA calculation.
The maximum of the presented conditional portfolio value series is 66.51. Our
potential exposure equals the positive mark-to-market value of our portfolio. This is
given by the difference between the initial value of the contract and the conditional
value of the contract, which is EUR 16.75 for our example. This value is discounted with
the deposit rate for a particular tenure (the average of a one-year deposit rate is in our
case 2.84%), multiplied by (1-RR), and fi nally, multiplied by PDs. The PDs are presented
in Appendix 2 and the relevant CVAs in Appendix 3. CVA, as it was mentioned before, is
the market value of credit risk which bears the counterparties in OTC trading.
Figure 4 | The Illustrative Simulation for the BL M Time Series
Source: Author’s analysis
The funding costs contain two parts. The fi rst one, cost of deposited margin, is calculated
as the opportunity cost of the obligated margin deposit. We calculate with a margin require-
ment of EUR 4.5 in our illustrative case for the BL M contract type. According to Equation 2.8
we also calculate with the yield difference – 0.95%. For the calculation of the second funding
cost, we use the conditional value set as the 1st percentile of our stochastic simulation.
The difference between the initial value of 1 MWh of electricity and the conditional V value
t
is multiplied by the related spot interest rate. As we use the average value in this case, we
calculate with the value rON= 1.88%. The sum of both parts of the funding cost is fi nally
discounted with the particular rate r to receive the present value of the money. Funding costs
tau
are EUR 0.16 in our illustrative example. As it was mentioned before, the funding costs are
the opportunity costs of electricity contracts traded via a power exchange.
254 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015

The Critical PD, in other words, the probability of default for which it is economi-
cally irrelevant whether we trade via exchange or OTC is calculated as the PD for which
CVA equals the funding costs. In our case, we got the critical PD 1.6% which represents
a company with a credit rating somewhere between Ba2 and Ba3 of Moody’s rating scale.
If a counterparty has a rating or PD which is better than the critical value, we should
trade OTC. If the counterparty’s rating is worse than the critical, we should trade on an
exchange.
After the illustrative calculation, we reveal the results of the critical PDs value for all
product types presented in Table 1. We calculate the characteristic for the average values
of daily volatilities as well as for 99th percentile and 1st percentile. We use the average
values of the related interest rates from Table 2, for the funding costs calculations. Results
of the described analysis is in the Table 3.
Table 3  |  Values of the Critical PD for the Table 1 Contract Type Characteristics Data and Average
of the Related Interest Rate Data from Table 2
Starting price  1st percentile  Average  99th percentile  Margin
Critical PD
|      | (EUR) | (%)   | (%)  | (%)  | (EUR) |
| ---- | ----- | ----- | ---- | ---- | ----- |
| BL M | 49.75 | 39.59 | 1.60 | 1.05 | 4.5   |
| BL Q | 50.44 | 27.13 | 1.49 | 0.97 | 2.9   |
| BL Y | 52.35 | 24.22 | 1.53 | 1.13 | 2.7   |
| PL M | 61.95 | 56.00 | 1.78 | 1.08 | 7.5   |
| PL Q | 63.1  | 27.04 | 1.44 | 0.82 | 3.7   |
| PL Y | 66.25 | 24.90 | 1.45 | 1.14 | 3.5   |
Source: PXE data, author’s analysis
The critical PDs are very high for contracts with very low volatilities (around
1st percentile of all contracts traded on PXE). Therefore it is more economical to trade
such contracts OTC. The critical PDs for the contracts with the average volatilities of
each contract type, varies from 1.44% to 1.78%. We get the highest values for the month
products, where the margin requirements are quite high. The critical PDs for high volatility
contracts varies from 0.82% to 1.14%, which could be presented as the rating between
Ba1 and Ba2 on the Moody’s rating scale.
The average values of the related interest rates are quite high compared to the interest
rates of a post-crisis period. Therefore, we perform an analysis where we use the average
values of the contracts type volatilities of each contract type. But with the 1st percentile
and 99th percentile of the related interest rate values as they are presented in Table 2.
The results are in Table 4.
| Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     |     | 255 |
| ----------------------------- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- |

Table 4  |  Values of the Critical PD for the Table 2 Related Interest Rate Data and Average
of the Contract Type Characteristics Data from Table 1
|             | Starting price  | 1st percentile  | Average  99th percentile  |      |              |
| ----------- | --------------- | --------------- | ------------------------- | ---- | ------------ |
| Critical PD |                 |                 |                           |      | Margin (EUR) |
|             | (EUR)           | (%)             | (%)                       | (%)  |              |
| BL M        | 49.75           | 0.25            | 1.60                      | 3.63 | 4.5          |
| BL Q        | 50.44           | 0.20            | 1.49                      | 3.32 | 2.9          |
| BL Y        | 52.35           | 0.21            | 1.53                      | 3.50 | 2.7          |
| PL M        | 61.95           | 0.29            | 1.78                      | 3.86 | 7.5          |
| PL Q        | 63.1            | 0.21            | 1.44                      | 3.33 | 3.7          |
| PL Y        | 66.25           | 0.20            | 1.45                      | 3.25 | 3.5          |
Source: PXE data, author’s analysis
It is obvious that the critical PDs decrease dramatically when we use the low interest
rate characteristics. For the period of very low interest rates the critical PDs implies Moody’s
rating around Baa2. Trading on the PXE is much more economical during the period with
low interest rates than during the period with a high level of related interest rates.
4.   Conclusion
The Credit Value Adjustment is a powerful tool, which allows us to quantify the market
value of credit/counterparty risk. Using this tool we can perform the analysis of the
economic effectiveness of both types of trading; OTC and via exchange. The funding
costs, which are typical for exchange trading, can be compared to the CVA, which is
the potential cost of OTC trading. The optimal way of trading can be recommended for
the various parameters as the counterparty’s default probability, the level of related interest
rates, the volatility of traded instruments etc.  Research shows how the critical probability
of counterparty’s default (the default probability for which it is economically indifferent
whether we trade OTC or via exchange) varies with the different input parameters from
the values around 50%, for the contracts with the very low volatility, to the values around
0.2% which represents credit rating around Baa2, for the very low level of the related
interest rate values.
The analyses presented above could be meant as an introduction to a more precise
analysis on the energy trading company’s risk management level. The series of assumptions
and simplifi cations led to the indicated results. The real estimation of the recovery rate
should be performed for each counterparty (there is a signifi cant difference whether we
trade with a small trading company or with a large power producer), the more suitable
stochastic model for power contracts prices development should be applied as well as
the stochastic model for yield curve modelling. The existence of the so-called general
wrong way risk should be taken into account. General wrong-way risk is a term used to
describe possible sources of positive correlation between the exposure and the probability
of default. The calculation with the wrong-way risk would probably increase the CVA,
which could make trading via an exchange more economical. A more detailed research
of the CVA application in the energy sector is still required.
| 256 |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     | Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |     |
| --- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | ----------------------------- | --- |

References
Arlt, J., Arltová, M. (2007), Ekonomické časové řady. Prague: Grada Publishing.
Cartea, A., Marcelo, G. F. (2005), “Pricing in Electricity Markets: A Mean Reverting Jump
Diff usion Model with Seasonality.” Applied Mathematical Finance, Vol. 12, No. 4,
pp. 313–335.
Horník, T., Drahovzal, O. (2008), “Electro-Energetics – Managing New Risks.” Ekonomika
a management, Vol. 2, No. 3.
Hull, J. (2009), Options, Futures and Other Derivatives. 7th Ed. Upper Saddle River: Pearson
Prentice Hall.
Kiesel, R., Schindlmayr, G., Boerger, R. H. (2009), “A Two-Factor Model for the Electricity
Forward Market (February 1. 2007).” Quantitative Finance. Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 279–287.
Málek, J. (2005), Dynamika úrokových měr a úrokové deriváty. Prague: Ekopress.
Meyer-Brandis, T., Tankov, P. (2007), “Multi-Factor Jump-Diff usion Models of Electricity Prices.”
International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, Vol. 11, No. 5, pp. 503–528.
PXE Rules and Regulations Power Exchange Central Europe. a.s. Available at: http://www.pxe.cz/
dokument.aspx?k=Legislativa-PXE
Pykhtin, M., Zhu, S. H. (2007), “A Guide to Modelling Counterparty Credit Risk.” Global
Association of Risk Professionals, No. 37, pp. 16–32.
Witzany, J. (2010), Credit Risk Management and Modeling. Prague: Oeconomica.
Yi, Ch., Tchernitser, A., Hurd, T. (2010), “Randomized Structural Models of Credit Spreads.”
Quantitative Finance. Vol. 11, No. 9, pp. 1301–1313.
Volume 24 | Number 03 | 2015 PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS 257

Appendix 1
Table A1  |  Detailed Characteristics of Historical Volatilities for Particular Contract Groups
Contracts
|     | Statistics | Volatility (%) | Margin (EUR) |     |
| --- | ---------- | -------------- | ------------ | --- |
type
|     | Average       | 0.81 |      |     |
| --- | ------------- | ---- | ---- | --- |
|     | Max           | 2.16 |      |     |
| M   | 99-percentile | 1.87 | 4.50 |     |
|     | Min           | 0.01 |      |     |
|     | 1-percentile  | 0.01 |      |     |
|     | Average       | 0.80 |      |     |
|     | Max           | 2.27 |      |     |
BL
| Q    | 99-percentile | 2.08 | 2.90 |     |
| ---- | ------------- | ---- | ---- | --- |
|      | Min           | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | 1-percentile  | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | Average       | 0.71 |      |     |
|      | Max           | 1.38 |      |     |
| Y    | 99-percentile | 1.36 | 2.70 |     |
|      | Min           | 0.00 |      |     |
|      | 1-percentile  | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | Average       | 0.83 |      |     |
|      | Max           | 2.32 |      |     |
| M    | 99-percentile | 2.05 | 7.50 |     |
|      | Min           | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | 1-percentile  | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | Average       | 0.81 |      |     |
|      | Max           | 2.77 |      |     |
| PL Q | 99-percentile | 2.47 | 3.70 |     |
|      | Min           | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | 1-percentile  | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | Average       | 0.82 |      |     |
|      | Max           | 1.55 |      |     |
| Y    | 99-percentile | 1.55 | 3.50 |     |
|      | Min           | 0.01 |      |     |
|      | 1-percentile  | 0.01 |      |     |
Source: PXE data, author’s analysis
| 258 |     | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     | Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 |
| --- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | ----------------------------- |

Appendix 2
Table A2  |  Default Probabilities Calculated for the Range of the Assets over Debt Ratios and Ratio
Volatility
|     | Volatility of the assets over debts ratio |     |     |     |     |
| --- | ----------------------------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
PDs 0.20% 0.40% 0.60% 0.80% 1.00% 1.20% 1.40% 1.60% 1.80% 2.00%
1.08 0.74% 12.08% 22.02% 29.59% 34.04% 37.49% 40.93% 43.10% 44.34% 46.65%
1.13 0.00% 2.88% 10.45% 18.64% 23.93% 28.81% 33.15% 36.20% 38.31% 41.05%
oitar tbed revo stessa ehT
1.18 0.00% 0.34% 4.43% 10.97% 15.93% 21.28% 26.13% 30.01% 32.60% 35.42%
1.23 0.00% 0.06% 1.70% 6.11% 10.39% 15.47% 20.51% 24.17% 27.65% 30.43%
1.28 0.00% 0.01% 0.59% 3.01% 6.98% 10.86% 15.75% 19.55% 23.33% 26.52%
1.33 0.00% 0.00% 0.22% 1.40% 4.15% 7.72% 11.54% 15.87% 19.28% 22.17%
1.38 0.00% 0.00% 0.09% 0.64% 2.48% 5.09% 8.66% 12.49% 16.09% 18.95%
1.43 0.00% 0.00% 0.02% 0.25% 1.50% 3.48% 6.35% 9.87% 13.18% 16.26%
1.48 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.10% 0.87% 2.30% 4.83% 7.77% 10.64% 13.73%
1.53 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.03% 0.43% 1.40% 3.43% 5.98% 8.49% 11.60%
Source: author’s analysis
Appendix 3
Table A3  |  CVA Calculated for the Range of the Assets over Debt Ratios and Ratio Volatility
for the Average Volatility of BL M Contract from Table 1, with the Average Level of the Related
Interest Rates from Table 3
|     | Volatility of the assets over debts ratio |     |     |     |     |
| --- | ----------------------------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
PDs 0.20% 0.40% 0.60% 0.80% 1.00% 1.20% 1.40% 1.60% 1.80% 2.00%
| 1.08 0.07 | 1.18 2.15 | 2.89 3.33 | 3.67 4.00 | 4.22 4.34 | 4.56 |
| --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | ---- |
oitar tbed revo stessa ehT 1.13 0.00 0.28 1.02 1.82 2.34 2.82 3.24 3.54 3.75 4.02
| 1.18 0.00 | 0.03 0.43 | 1.07 1.56 | 2.08 2.56 | 2.94 3.19 | 3.47 |
| --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | --------- | ---- |
| 1.23 0.00 | 0.01 0.17 | 0.60 1.02 | 1.51 2.01 | 2.36 2.70 | 2.98 |
| 1.28 0.00 | 0.00 0.06 | 0.29 0.68 | 1.06 1.54 | 1.91 2.28 | 2.59 |
| 1.33 0.00 | 0.00 0.02 | 0.14 0.41 | 0.76 1.13 | 1.55 1.89 | 2.17 |
| 1.38 0.00 | 0.00 0.01 | 0.06 0.24 | 0.50 0.85 | 1.22 1.57 | 1.85 |
| 1.43 0.00 | 0.00 0.00 | 0.02 0.15 | 0.34 0.62 | 0.97 1.29 | 1.59 |
| 1.48 0.00 | 0.00 0.00 | 0.01 0.09 | 0.23 0.47 | 0.76 1.04 | 1.34 |
| 1.53 0.00 | 0.00 0.00 | 0.00 0.04 | 0.14 0.34 | 0.59 0.83 | 1.13 |
Source: author’s analysis
| Volume 24 |  Number 03 | 2015 | PRAGUE ECONOMIC PAPERS |     |     |     | 259 |
| ----------------------------- | ---------------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- |